SPS HANDBOOK
Living in Community

2017–18

SCHOOL MISSION
St. Paul’s School is a fully residential academic community that pursues the highest
ideals of scholarship. We strive to challenge our students intellectually and morally
– to nurture a love for learning and a commitment to engage as servant leaders
in a complex world. Founded in the Episcopal tradition, St. Paul’s School models
and teaches a respect for self and others; for one’s spiritual, physical, and emotional
well-being; for the natural environment; and for service to a greater good.
Adopted 2007
SCHOOL MOTTO
Let us learn those things on earth the knowledge of which continues in Heaven.
St. Jerome, Epistle 53
St. Paul’s School Motto
SCHOOL PRAYER
Grant, O Lord,
That in all the joys of life, we may never forget to be kind.
Help us to be unselfish in friendship,
Thoughtful of those less happy than ourselves,
And eager to bear the burdens of others;
Through Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.
Chapel Services & Prayers
SCHOOL HONOR CODE
To live honorably, we, as members of the St. Paul’s community, strive to be 		
truthful, respectful, and kind.
Revised by the Student Council, 2015

The Student Handbook is subject to updates throughout the year; the most recent version,
fully searchable, is posted on millville.sps.edu.

As a four-year, coeducational boarding school, St. Paul’s values as significant
characteristics of life at the school: academic achievement, physical vigor, spiritual
richness, and healthy human relationships. The curriculum is comprehensive
and strives to meet the needs and abilities of each student. At St. Paul’s School,
the word “curriculum” describes all of the structured experiences in which students participate: classes, athletics, service, activities, and life in the residential
houses. All of these settings involve interactions and a fundamental trust between
faculty and students, considered to be at the heart of our collective pursuit as an
educational community. Robust and healthy relationships are fostered in many
ways: through daily contact with faculty, the formal advising system, the Living
in Community (LINC) program and opportunities in the daily schedule including
classes, meals, Chapel, athletics, activities, and special events.
As a member of this fully residential community, students are offered unique
opportunities for cooperation, collaboration, and lasting friendships with peers,
faculty, and staff. Although we are a diverse school composed of people with a
broad range of interests and traditions, respect for others is essential in the fabric
of our lives here. We ask, for example, that you be polite and appropriate in all
verbal and electronic communications and that you consider carefully how your
words, dress, and actions influence others and may have the potential to offend
if they are not chosen thoughtfully. By listening when someone else is speaking,
being considerate of all those living and working here, helping to maintain a safe
and clean environment in the houses and grounds, following directions given by
any adult in the community, using public spaces appropriately, and considering how
behavior and communications affect or influence others, we are showing respect
for all members of the SPS community. We expect that students will stand up and
intervene, as appropriate, when they witness behavior that negatively affects others.
We believe that diversity in all of its forms is the bedrock of institutional excellence, and at SPS, our diversity is rich. We believe that all community members are
responsible for nurturing a spirit of inclusivity and welcome in the following ways:
• support all students, faculty, and staff as they work to define themselves and
to find their places in an increasingly diverse school community and a rapidly
changing world;
• advance cross-cultural exchange within the School through both formal events
and informal programs;
• foster a deeper understanding of, and respect for, the diverse backgrounds of
SPS community members;
• eliminate barriers that may prevent people with specific racial, ethnic, religious, gender, age, or class affiliations or of any sexual orientation from
participating fully in the community;
• act as allies, advocates, and advisers for those experiencing cultural alienation
within the school; and
• uphold the sentiment that we benefit by learning from those different than
ourselves, which in turn enhances the education, learning, and understanding
of us all.

2

Contents
Community Structure................................................................................ 5

Living in Community (LINC)...............................................................................5
Student Support Systems.......................................................................................9
Adult Resources for Support...............................................................................10
Peer Resources for Support ................................................................................15
Student Life............................................................................................. 17

House Life...........................................................................................................17
Chapel.................................................................................................................21
Clark House........................................................................................................23
Leaves of Absence and Returning from Leaves...................................................38
Leaving School Grounds ....................................................................................47
Safety on the Grounds ........................................................................................52
Student Leadership..............................................................................................62
Daily Life.............................................................................................................64
Activities, Events, and Meetings.........................................................................72
Expectations and Policies........................................................................ 77

Academic Expectations and Policies...................................................................77
Major School Expectations..................................................................................89
Alcohol and Drug Testing Policy and Procedures...............................................96
Healthy Relationships ........................................................................................96
Harassment, Discrimination, Hazing, Assault, and
Bullying and the Community Conduct Board (CCB).........................................98
Community Conduct Board (CCB)..................................................................105
NH Anti-Hazing Law/Safe School Zone Reporting...........................................109
Appropriate Use of Technology.........................................................................114
Appropriate Use: School Publications, WSPS
and Public Spaces .............................................................................................122

Responses to Violations.....................................................................................123
Violations of Expectations and Policies............................................................124
Disciplinary Reporting Policy...........................................................................131
Other Resources....................................................................................137

How Absences are Reported/How to Clear Them ............................................137
Expenses............................................................................................................138
Staying in Touch................................................................................................140
What to Bring From Home...............................................................................142
Meals and Deliveries.........................................................................................143
Technology Resources.......................................................................................144
Campus Vocabulary..........................................................................................149

4

Community Structure
Living in Community (LINC)
Living in Community provides the developmental framework that directs and
supports our integrated curriculum. Designed to “educate toward a greater good,”
LINC is built upon the core values of St. Paul’s School (love, kindness, compassion,
humility, unselfishness, inclusivity, and the pursuit of wisdom) and is intentionally
interwoven in all areas of school life. Distilled, these values are represented in the
LINC slogan: to be kind and live honorably.
• Be Kind: Thoughtful, Unselfish, Compassionate, Inclusive
• Live Honorably: Respectful, Responsible, Safe
LINC aspires to pro-actively shape, foster, and sustain a school culture that is inclusive, healthy and fun. We achieve this by providing comprehensive, coherent,
and evidence-based programs and experiences that build skills and capacities that
enable SPS students to live in alignment with the school values. LINC is built on
best practices associated with prevention programming.
SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL EDUCATION

“Social and emotional learning is the process through which children and adults
acquire and effectively apply the knowledge, attitudes, and skills necessary to
understand and manage emotions, set and achieve positive goals, feel and show
empathy for others, establish and maintain positive relationships, and make responsible decisions” (The Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional Learning).
As a fully residential Episcopal school, St. Paul’s is committed to a relational context
for learning. Our holistic philosophy includes the academic, social, emotional,
physical, and spiritual facets of human development. This approach derives from
an understanding of children being in the process of becoming and acknowledges that growth is active and multi-faceted rather than didactic. We accept that
dissonance and discomfort are a natural and necessary part of the development
process, and understand that children must take risks and experience failure in
order to develop and learn.
Development does not, however, occur in a vacuum. As a result, we strive to create
an environment in which children can experience authentic, meaningful relationships with adults. It is within the context of these relationships–in classrooms, in
houses, and beyond–that perspectives can be challenged and real growth occurs.
Strong relationships and a clear understanding of shared community expectations
equip St. Paul’s students to live out our school values on a daily basis; to be kind
and to live honorably.

5

THE FIVE CORE SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL COMPETENCIES

All components of the LINC curriculum aid in the development of five critical
social and emotional competencies, and their associated skills. The five competencies are self awareness, self management, social awareness, relationship skills,
and responsible decision making.
Competency 1: Self Awareness
Self Awareness is the ability to accurately recognize one’s emotions and thoughts
and their influence on behavior. This includes accurately assessing one’s strengths
and limitations and possessing a well-grounded sense of confidence and optimism.
Associated Skills:
• Developing capacity for self-reflection
• Identifying and labeling emotions
• Demonstrating compassion for self
• Identifying and cultivating one’s strengths and positive qualities
• Recognizing the multi-faceted nature of identity
Competency 2: Self Management
Self Management is the ability to regulate one’s emotions, thoughts, and behaviors effectively in different situations. This includes managing stress, controlling
impulses, motivating oneself, and setting and working toward achieving personal
and academic goals.
Associated Skills:
• Monitoring and regulating feelings so that they aid rather than impede the
handling of situations
• Establishing and maintaining a growth mindset
• Caring for and advocating on behalf of oneself
Competency 3: Social Awareness
Social Awareness is the ability to take the perspective of and empathize with others
from diverse backgrounds and cultures, to understand social and ethical norms for
behavior, and to recognize family, school, and community resources and supports.
Associated Skills:
• Identifying and understanding the thoughts and feelings of others
• Understanding that individual and group differences complement each other
and make the world more interesting
• Applying critical analysis skills to media and social contexts
• Recognizing one’s own privilege and a commitment to leverage that privilege
on behalf of others

6

Competency 4: Relationship Skills
Relationship Skills is the ability to establish and maintain healthy and rewarding
relationships with diverse individuals and groups. This includes communicating
clearly, listening actively, cooperating, resisting inappropriate social pressure,
negotiating conflict constructively, and seeking and offering help when needed.
Associated Skills:
• Using verbal and nonverbal skills to express oneself and promote positive
and effective exchanges with others
• Establishing and maintaining healthy and rewarding connections with diverse
individuals and groups
• Achieving mutually satisfactory resolutions to conflict by addressing the needs
of all concerned
• Effectively conveying and following through with one’s decision not to engage
in unwanted, unsafe, unethical, or unlawful conduct
Competency 5: Responsible Decision Making
Responsible Decision Making is the ability to make constructive and respectful
choices about personal behavior and social interactions based on consideration
of ethical standards, safety concerns, social norms, the realistic evaluation of
consequences of various actions, and the well-being of self and others.
Associated Skills:
• Accurately perceiving situations in which a decision is to be made, and assessing factors that might influence one’s response
• Recognizing and understanding one’s obligation to engage in ethical, safe,
and legal behaviors
• Believing that others deserve to be treated with kindness and compassion,
and feeling motivated to contribute to the common good
• Generating, implementing and evaluating positive and informed solutions to
problems
• Identifying and accessing appropriate resources
• Identifying and intervening in unsafe, unkind behaviors, and/or illegal behaviors
DIRECT LINC PROGRAMMING

The Living in Community (LINC) Program is composed of an array of classes,
programs, and experiences that target all SPS students. It includes two foundational courses for the Third and Fourth Form students, a Seminar for Fifth and
Sixth Formers, LINC content-informed house meetings, form-based Community
Outreach Days, LINC Days, and an array of other opportunities and experiences
directed at both faculty and students.

7

Courses and Seminar
Third Form students participate in a yearlong course which meets once each week.
Care is taken to create a safe space in which students can talk about important
or sensitive issues in the presence of a trusted adult and LINC Leader. Although
important content regarding a wide range of topics is delivered over the course
of the year, the primary focus of these classes is not didactic. Rather, emphasis
is on the ability to explore and express thoughts, feelings and beliefs. In these
courses, the content provides the vehicle to develop skills and competencies that
will aid students in learning from one’s self and one another while respecting and
understanding diverse perspectives and backgrounds.
Fourth Form students participate in a LINC class for one term of their Fourth
Form year that meets three days per week. While the content areas are, to a degree,
similar to those in the Third Form course, the Fourth Form course is focused on
the power of social norms and aims to equip participants with the skills and knowledge necessary to be critical consumers (and creators!) of the world around them.
Fifth and Sixth Form students participate in a seminar which meets nine times
over the course of the school year. The purpose of the seminar is to create safe
spaces for students to discuss topics related to healthy relationships. Content is
focused on aspects of human sexuality including sexual health and reproduction,
sexual identity, intimacy, affirmative consent, sensuality, and sexualization. An
examination of the diversity of beliefs and values associated with these topics is
central to the discussion.
Other Programming
In addition to the form specific courses and seminars, LINC-related content and
topics will be incorporated into or addressed through a number of other means
that will affect the entire school community (students, faculty, and parents). These
will include three, one-day events (LINC Days) that are typically student designed
and implemented, and feature an outside speaker or presentation for the entire
school community. Other opportunities for direct program delivery are form-based
meetings, House meetings, and student leadership trainings.
LINC LEADERS

Most Third and Fourth Form LINC classes are co-facilitated by one adult and one
student LINC Leader. LINC Leaders are Fifth or Sixth Form students who demonstrate a sincere dedication to the mission and wellbeing of the St. Paul’s School
community and who are prepared to take on a significant commitment as both
authors and co-facilitators of the ongoing LINC curriculum for a full academic year.
LINC Leaders and LINC Faculty work together in pairs to deliver lesson plans,
based upon a provided LINC curriculum. There lesson plans engage LINC participants in creating a safe space for interesting discussions, activities and projectbased learning that considers the joy, challenges and conundrums of life as an
adolescent living in an intentionally diverse residential community.
8

In addition to co-facilitating LINC classes, LINC Leaders are expected to perform
as consultants to the larger LINC program. LINC Leaders will work with the faculty of the LINC program to identify and implement learning opportunities for
the entire SPS community.

Student Support Systems
As a fully residential Episcopal school, St. Paul’s is committed to a relational context
for learning. Our holistic philosophy includes the academic, social, emotional,
physical, and spiritual facets of human development. This approach derives from
an understanding of children being in the process of becoming, and acknowledges that growth is active and multi-faceted rather than didactic. We accept that
dissonance and discomfort are a natural and necessary part of the development
process, and understand that children must take risks and experience failure in
order to develop and learn.
Development does not, however, occur in a vacuum. As a result, we strive to create
an environment in which children can experience authentic, meaningful relationships with adults. It is within the context of these relationships – in classrooms, in
houses, and beyond – that perspectives can be challenged, and real growth occurs.
Differentiated expectations and programs help students learn safe, responsible and
respectful behavior while honoring the process of ongoing human development.
Our approach to education is brought to life through the practice of Engagement,
Empathy, and Education.
ENGAGE

•
•
•
•

We are present in the lives of our students.
We are intentional in selecting the right moments to engage our students.
We are mindful of the issues we choose to engage in with our students.
We are self-reflective in our engagement and strive to listen first.

EMPATHIZE

• We approach our work with students from a position of curiosity and empathy.
• We take time to understand student behavior, thoughts, and feelings in the
context of their unique experiences and developmental stage.
• We work alongside young people to form healthy and collaborative relationships based on shared understandings and mutual accountability.
EDUCATE

• We acknowledge that influencing development is an ongoing process.
• We strive to educate rather than “fix” our students.
• We reflect critically on our own practice and actions as educators so as to
engage in a process of continuous learning.
• We empower young people to become the authentic authors of their own
education and experience.
9

Adult Resources for Support
ADVISERS

Advisers are the adults most responsible for a student at our School and should be
the first contact a parent has with the School if there is any concern or question
regarding his or her child. They serve as the primary liaison between student,
parent, and teacher.
Advisers are accessible and genuinely interested in the students. When a student
needs help, the adviser either provides it or finds the necessary assistance. Advisers strive to cultivate an atmosphere of trust in which students can openly discuss
personal issues. In addition to offering a listening ear and practical assistance, the
adviser is a source of reliable information regarding policy and procedures and
opportunities in the School as well as in the surrounding community. Advisers
assist students in their academic programs and course selections, keep abreast of
students’ athletic commitments and community activities, and provide the friendship, support, trust, and understanding that undergird growth and development.
Advisers call or write parents at the start of each year and communicate formally
several times a year and informally as often as necessary. Most new students are
assigned faculty advisers who live in student houses. Houses have an average of
three live-in faculty members to approximately 30 students.
Other advisers include members of the faculty, School clergy, School counselors,
the deans, and the vice rectors. Additional sources of support for students include
student leaders and house prefects.
HEADS OF HOUSE

The head of house position is an important and valued faculty role at St. Paul’s
School. Stated simply, the head of house sets the tone for her or his house, and
in doing so, helps to imbue all SPS students with the core values of our school,
namely to be kind (thoughtful, unselfish, and compassionate) and to live honorably (respectful, responsible, and safe).
The heads of house, in collaboration with the Dean of Students Office and Clark
House, are the chief stewards of residential life at St. Paul’s School. Their principal charge is to create a safe, inclusive, and healthy residential program for our
community.
The head of house team identifies and develops consistent expectations for students, works collaboratively to develop best practices for faculty and advises the
dean of students, vice rector for school life, and the Rector regarding residential
policy development.

10

DEAN OF STUDENTS OFFICE

At St. Paul’s School, we believe in the power of positive student culture, and we
strive to create and nurture a healthy environment where every student is able to
explore, grow, and become their most authentic self.
The Dean of Students Office will ensure that St. Paul’s School is a community
where students are respectful, responsible and safe by delineating clear expectations, promoting positive behaviors, and holding students accountable.
The Dean of Students Office strives to support students in every aspect of their
residential life at St. Paul’s School. The dean of students team handles matters
concerning student health and wellness, activities, off-campus programs, leadership development, daily attendance, special permissions, discipline, and more.
VICE RECTOR FOR SCHOOL LIFE

The vice rector for school life is responsible for advancing the health and wellness
of the School community, specifically with regard to inclusivity in every realm
of the School – race, class, ethnicity, gender, religion, nationality, sexual orientation, and/or disability. The vice rector for school life collaborates with community
members (students, parents, faculty, and staff) to design, implement, and monitor programs and strategies to foster pro-social behavior and reduce student risk
behaviors, attitudes, and experiences. The vice rector for school life is available
to support students and faculty interested in developing and fostering initiatives
to build a healthy, inclusive culture.
STUDENT REVIEW PROCESS

Each fall, all new students will be reviewed by their respective house advising
teams and returning fourth and fifth form students will be reviewed during the
winter term. Students who are identified as potentially in need of additional support will be referred to the Student Review Committee or the Student Teacher
Assistance Team.
STUDENT REVIEW COMMITTEE

The Student Review Committee is comprised of the vice rector for school life,
the dean of studies, the dean of students, the director of counseling, the director
of college advising, director of academic support, and a representative from the
Admission Office. Other relevant adults will be consulted and may be invited to
participate in the discussion.
Students referred to the committee will be assessed in regards to their basic functional skill expectations in all realms of school life. The committee will make
recommendations that may include required engagement with appropriate support structures and recommendations to the family and rector about the student’s
ability to thrive at St. Paul’s School. In cases where the student does not meet this
criteria, the committee will recommend that the family consider withdrawal or
recommend to the Rector that the student is dismissed.
11

STUDENT TEACHER ASSISTANCE TEAM (STAT)

The vice rector for school life, in coordination with the Associate Dean for
Health and Wellness, oversees the Student Teacher Assistance Team (STAT).
STAT is a group that meets to problem-solve academic or health-related issues.
These concerns can be student specific or relevant to the entire community and
may include such issues as health leave, drug or alcohol use, unhealthy eating
patterns, learning issues, time management, or academic difficulties. The team,
which acts as a resource, is composed of core members that represent a variety
of support units within the School (Dean of Students Office, Dean of Studies,
student adviser, Clark House representative). Additional members are added as
needed, such as a chaplain, Director of Academic Support, and or teacher(s). A
referral to this problem-solving team can be made by anyone including a parent,
faculty members, adviser, or student. STAT responds by making recommendations
to address the concerns at issue.
CHAPLAINCY

The chaplaincy at St. Paul’s generates, lifts up, and lives out the values of Living in
Community for and with students, faculty, staff, and the wider SPS network through
prayer, programming, presence, and music. Our mission for 2017-2018 is “Hope.”
The chaplaincy is based in the Episcopal tradition, honors interfaith life and dialogue for our diverse community, and is committed to inclusive and multicultural
expressions of life on campus, working in close dialogue with the Rector, vice
rector for school life, and dean of students.
Chaplains are available for sacramental rites and pastoral care, to help with spiritual discernment, direct individuals to campus and wider resources (such as sites
of worship or Clark House), and for suggestions/collaboration regarding Chapel
programming.
CLARK HOUSE

The philosophy of Clark House is based on a developmental understanding of
early, middle, and late adolescence. Each of these stages, for our 13- to 19-yearolds, requires specific knowledge related to their physical, cognitive, social,
emotional, and moral growth. Kindness, courtesy, and humane discipline form
the core values from which we provide nurturing care while encouraging students
to take advantage of the School’s opportunities. We recognize the need for limits
and boundaries as well as offering a place for comfort. Clark House provides a
relaxed, quiet atmosphere in which students may recover from illness or injury
as well as develop a necessary and healthy balance in their lives.
Clark House is centrally located on the grounds of St. Paul’s School, across from
the Chapel and Ohrstrom Library and between the Rectory and Post Office, allowing for easy student access. Clark House consists of an inpatient and outpatient
wing, counseling offices, health resource library, conference room, and meditation
room. From this site, we provide and coordinate our medical, counseling, and
wellness services.
12

ACADEMIC AFFAIRS OFFICE

Our learner-centered classrooms reflect an understanding of how we learn best;
we all learn differently, but our teachers understand when, how, and why their
individual students learn. Our students assume responsibility for their own learning, following the belief that “The ones who do the work do the learning.” Our
shared responsibilities include:
Understand how we learn:
• Engage with the material and with each other
• Make discoveries rather than being told what to learn
• Repeat main ideas and consider them from different perspectives
Share common goals:
• Embrace and practice backward design
• Know where the course is going and what is expected of each of us
• Understand in advance the grading criteria for assessments
• Share homework assignments which are in line with homework guidelines
by the end of the class before homework is due
Assess our learning:
• Cultivate ongoing dialogue, collaboration, and feedback
• Enjoy a variety of assessments to measure progress
• Share feedback on assessments within two weeks, or before the next graded
assignment
• At least twice a term, we share student-to-teacher and teacher-to-student
feedback and discuss the class dynamics
ATHLETICS AND FITNESS

There are many different opportunities for athletic participation requiring varying levels of ability. SPS varsity teams usually meet six days a week; SPS JV teams
meet five days a week; club teams and instructional programs meet three or four
days a week. Some club teams are coed.
Athletic Trainers
Certified athletic trainers provide services in the area of prevention, evaluation,
treatment, and rehabilitation of injuries or illness sustained during practices or
games. Athletic training facilities are located in the Athletic & Fitness Center,
the Blass Club House, the Turf Field Building, and the Matthews Hockey Center.
The athletic trainers are available before and after practices and games. They also
schedule individual appointments.
Managers
Some varsity and JV teams have managers. Any student interested in managing a
team should see a coach. This does not fulfill an athletic requirement, but may, at
the coach’s discretion, be eligible for a JV or Varsity letter award.
13

Athletics Facility Coordinator
This person provides services in the area of training expertise. The office is located
in the Gillespie Strength & Fitness Center.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (IT)

The help desk
The IT Help Desk assists members of the SPS community (students, faculty, and
staff) in their use of the School’s information and communications technology. IT
staff covering the Help Desk are responsible for the following:
• Providing rapid response to all classroom technology issues
• Answering all user questions and inquiries
• Providing direct solutions to simple user problems or difficulties
• Referring more difficult problems that cannot be resolved over the telephone
to the appropriate it service personnel
• Notifying the sps community of any planned disruptions of service due to
the implementation of new technology or required preventive maintenance
Any failures of, or problems with SPS technology should be reported immediately
to the IT Help Desk by calling ext. 2000 or from outside the School 603-229-5698;
or by sending an e-mail to help@sps.edu.
The IT Help Desk is staffed Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Any
voice-mail or e-mail messages received after hours or on the weekends will be
cleared and addressed before 9 a.m. on the next business day.
The SPS community will be notified in advance if the Help Desk will not be staffed
during regular “business hours” and all voice-mail and e-mail messages will be
cleared and addressed by other IT personnel on an hourly basis.
Although IT’s primary responsibility is the support of School-owned hardware,
they will make every effort to assist students experiencing problems with their
personal computers. Students are invited to bring their “broken” computers to the
Schoolhouse Tech Shop during normal IT hours of operation. The IT technical
staff will attempt to diagnose and repair the hardware and/or software problems
at no charge to the student. Upon communicating the need to the student, IT will
bill back the student’s account for any parts required.
For more detailed information about IT services, see Daily Life.
SAFETY

Safety and security are, to a large extent, everyone’s concern at St. Paul’s School.
We all share in the responsibility of ensuring maximum safety and security for
the entire St. Paul’s School community.
The telephone number for emergencies occurring on school grounds is 9-1-1. An
emergency might be a fire, serious medical event or a police emergency, such as
14

a crime in progress. You do not need to dial 8 first when calling 9-1-1. You will
immediately be connected to emergency providers at NH E911. In addition, there
are four emergency phones located on campus for emergencies. These phones
connect you immediately to either SPS Safety or E911, depending on what button
you select at the phone. These are located at the Lindsay Center for Mathematics
and Science, the Boathouse and the Bogle-Lechner Turf Fields and Building. The
Lower Pond dock phone is a safety-only phone.
The School provides 24-hour safety coverage. The Safety officers may be contacted
from School phones by dialing ext. 4646. From other phones, dial 229-4646. You
will be connected directly to the duty officer. State your name, location, problem,
and the phone number from which you are calling. Give the information clearly
and briefly. The Safety Department can be reached 24 hours a day, 7 days per
week. Be aware however that the officer can only receive one call at a time, so it
may be necessary to call back if there is no answer. Escorts are available and their
use is encouraged for students returning to their houses from School activities
after check-in.
Students are encouraged to contact the Safety Department promptly should they
see any suspicious activity such as trespassers, prowlers, or a safety issue.
FACILITIES OPERATIONS AND ENGINEERING

The Facilities Department is responsible for both the operation and maintenance
of the School’s physical plant (buildings, grounds, waterways, utilities, etc.) and
also for the planning and oversight of capital projects, both new construction
and renovation. We are also responsible for managing the School’s Shipping and
Receiving and Post Offices.
We endeavor to always provide the students and staff of the School with a clean,
safe and comfortable working and living environment. Facilities staff are on-call
24 hours a day to respond to emergencies and can be reached by calling the Facilities Department during regular working hours and by calling SPS Safety at all
other times.

Peer Resources for Support
HOUSE PREFECTS

The Prefect Program provides a link between students and faculty within the residences, and works to ensure the wellbeing of student members of this residential
community. Prefects strive to make student life at St. Paul’s School welcoming,
comfortable, safe, and enjoyable by setting a positive example for all who live
and work in the house. It is the goal of every prefect to enthusiastically support,
monitor, and make a proactive effort to connect with students and faculty alike.
As leaders in the house, prefects set the standard for fairness and objectivity and
recognize the need to intervene and seek guidance from adults in times of crisis.
15

BIG BROTHERS/BIG SISTERS

Each new student is assigned a Big Brother or a Big Sister by the Admission Office.
These older students generally provide support and counsel to new students during their adjustment to the School. Big Brothers and Big Sisters are an excellent
source of information on all aspects of School life.
SPS BUDDIES

Every new Fourth and Fifth Form student is paired with a returning student buddy
in the same form. Buddies will help introduce their new student to the community
and be a friendly and helpful resource as the new student adjusts to life at SPS.
Buddies are expected to spend two hours each week together during fall term in
a combination of planned and casual events. Applications for the Buddy Program
will be available to rising Fourth and Fifth Form students during the spring term
and assignments will be made during the summer so that buddies can reach out
to new students before the start of the new school year.

16

Student Life
House Life
HOUSING ASSIGNMENTS

Students will live in one of the 18 residences that range in style from the 19th
century gothic architecture of Coit to the modern minimalist style of Conover/
Twenty. All houses, however, have been renovated to meet current safety standards
and contain mix of students by form. As part of the fully residential model of SPS,
all students are expected to learn to live in house community environment and may
be required to share a room with another student(s). Given the diverse range of
housing that exists, students may be required to live in singles, doubles or triples.
The Housing Committee, consisting of a group of faculty members including an
admissions officer and a representative from the Dean of Students Office, places
students in various dorms and room types (with roommates as appropriate). The
head of house then assigns both specific rooms within the house and the advisers.
For returning students, students have an opportunity to submit their preferences
for house, room, and adviser assignments each spring for the following year. The
Housing Committee works to accommodate student preferences to the extent
possible, however, they need to work within the constraints of the availability of
rooms and room types within the houses.
HOUSE MEETINGS

Weekly house meetings of all members of each residence are held to discuss both
house-specific issues, and broader LINC programming.
HOUSES AND PRIVACY

All members of the community should respect the privacy and property of others
and share in the creation of an environment that fosters the physical and emotional growth of each resident of the house. Because the advisers are the adults
directly responsible for the house and its residents, they must have access to any
room upon knocking and may confiscate any items not permitted on campus or
appropriate in a dormitory.
HOUSE CLEAN-UP AND MAINTENANCE

All students are responsible for routine cleaning in their own rooms. Tasks include
some sweeping, vacuuming, trash removal, and recycling. The house advisers and/
or prefects assign specific jobs to clean the common areas of the house, whether
permanently or on a rotating basis, and oversee the general condition of the dormitory. Students are expected to complete their assigned jobs as often as is deemed
necessary by the head of house. Professional custodians who mop the floors and
clean the bathrooms augment the housekeeping program. Fire safety inspectors
from the Facilities Office routinely inspect dorm rooms and common areas in the
evenings to identify safety hazards.

17

STUDY CONDITIONS

During the hours from 7:30 p.m. onwards, all houses should be quiet enough to
allow for effective study on nights preceding classes. Although different people
study at all different times during the day, the time after 7:30 p.m. is earmarked for
academic work. Faculty and students are asked to be especially aware of the needs
of other students to study in the house. As such, sound must be room-contained
during these hours. Music should be kept to a low volume, or headphones should
be employed so as not to disturb others.
SLEEP

Students should plan their time carefully to provide for at least eight hours of
sleep every night. It is suggested that Third Formers have their lights out by 10:30
p.m. and Fourth Formers by 11 p.m. A reasonable balance of work and sleep can
be achieved with planning and care. Advisers are a resource for students and can
help establish this balance.
CHECK-IN

Every student needs to check in to his or her house with the person on duty at
the end of each day. On special holidays and evenings, a late check-in may be
announced in Chapel. Standard check-in times are as follows:
Third Form
• Sunday through Friday, 9 p.m.
• Saturday, 11 p.m.
Fourth and Fifth Forms
• Sunday through Friday, 9:30 p.m.
• Saturday, 11 p.m.
Sixth Form
• Sunday through Friday, 10 p.m.
• Saturday, 12 midnight
HOUSE VISITING

While we acknowledge that some of our students do not identify as heterosexual,
our current housing structure operates under a binary system of boys dorms and
girls dorms. In order to promote healthy relationships, we have created rules that
govern room visits between a student from a girls dorm and a student from a boys
dorm. In an effort to make our room visiting policies as equitable and inclusive
as possible with respect to our LGBTQIA+ students and anyone involved in relationships that are other than heterosexual, our hope is that these students will
discuss their relationships privately with their adviser and adhere to our room
visiting policies.
INTERVISITATION

Intervisitation is a privilege afforded St. Paul’s students that allows for students of
the opposite gender to visit one another’s rooms. Students use intervisitation as a
18

means to interact socially and academically and to develop healthy relationships
and mutual trust. The hours of intervisitation recognize the School’s responsibility
to supervise its students.
Intervisitation hours:
• Sunday through Friday 7:30 to 9 p.m.
• Saturday 8 to 11 p.m.
Intervisitation Protocol & Expectations
• All visitors, regardless of gender, greet the adviser on duty when they enter
the house.
• Students then indicate whom they would like to visit.
• The adviser approves or denies the request.
• The student then signs in and notes the time in the house visitor log book.
• Visiting students must sign out and leave the dorm by first check (either
9 p.m. or 11 p.m., depending on the evening).
In addition, heads of house and advisers on duty have the discretionary power of
limiting the times or days of intervisitation, the number of students visiting one
student/room, as well as the discretion to limit whether or not particular students
are allowed to have visitors on school nights (e.g., an adviser may indicate that
a student who is struggling academically may not have any visitors for a period
of time).
Intervisitation & Sexual Intimacy
Intervisitation is not the time or place for the purpose of physical intimacy beyond
a level that is acceptable in more public areas of campus (i.e., activity beyond
hand-holding, putting an arm around a friend, etc.).
Addendum to Hours of Intervisitation
In addition to the hours of intervisitation, students may visit each other in some of
the common areas of the houses. Each head of house will establish parameters for
these hours and locations. These parameters will be discussed and made known
to the residents of the house and will be posted in the common rooms.
OVERNIGHT GUESTS

Because advisers must know exactly who is in the house in case of emergency, SPS
students may spend the night in another house only with an adviser’s permission,
granted well in advance and not on nights preceding classes.
STUDENT ROOMS

Students are welcome to furnish their room to reflect their own personal style;
however, student rooms are the property of the School and must be treated with
respect and care. We value our residential life and strive to maintain high standards for residential spaces. Students have a responsibility to maintain those high
standards when occupying or using these spaces. (See Student Standards for more
19

information on use of rooms.) Finally, any ostentatious display of lifestyle, clothing, possessions, or sexuality is inappropriate.
School bureaus are equipped with hardware that enables students to lock ONE
drawer, where valuables may be stored. Locks are available at the school store.
In addition, students may elect to bring either a trunk or a lock box. Please note
that students may be required to open any of these spaces upon a faculty request.
Only upholstered furniture that has been certified and labeled to have passed either
the California Technical Bulletin 117 (2013 edition) or National Fire Protection
Association Standard 260 (2009 edition) are to be used in school houses. Upholstered furniture that does not meet this criteria will not be allowed to remain in
student rooms.
Additional Furnishings
In addition to the School-provided furnishings, students may have one piece of upholstered furniture and other furnishings as long as the room is not over crowded.
Some rooms may accommodate one small sofa. Before bringing or purchasing any
item, check to make sure it meets with the fire regulations and is approved by
the head of house. The head of house also must be consulted before changing or
substituting any room furnishings.
Students are responsible for the condition of their rooms and School furnishings.
House and room inspections are carried out regularly during the year to ensure
safety, cleanliness, and hygiene. All rooms must meet a final year-end inspection;
diplomas will be awarded only to graduating students whose rooms have passed
year-end inspection. Students are responsible for leaving their room in its original
condition, including the school furniture. Any damages beyond normal wear and
tear are the responsibility of the student and student accounts may be charged for
replacement, repair, or cleaning services.
Students may not store any belongings on campus over the summer. However,
the school coordinates with a private moving and storage company that some
students choose to utilize.
Items that are not allowed include:
(See Safety Department for a complete list of appliances and furnishings.)
• Pets – fish, hamsters, turtles, frogs, or any other living animal
• Refrigerators (except prefects and Sixth Form LINC Leaders)
• Appliances – water heaters, hot plates, toasters or microwave ovens, irons,
or coffeemakers (including Keurig-type coffee machines), popcorn poppers,
etc.
• Electric blankets
• Televisions, pay cable services, Apple TV devices, Chromecast, or Roku
players, etc.
• Halogen lamps
20

• Sofa beds
• Portable two-way electronic communications devices or laser directional
lights
• Prescription medication – see Clark House (the health center) policies
• Paraphernalia used to hold or consume alcohol or other drugs (vaporizers,
shot glasses, empty alcohol bottles, etc.)
• Sexually explicit images or images glorifying alcohol and/or drug use (see
your head of house for guidance)
ROOM SEARCHES

Room searches occur when adults have reason to believe a disciplinary infraction
or safety concerns exist. On the occasion when a search is necessary, it will be
done by a member of the Dean of Students Office and/or the head of house in the
presence of another adult.
If the student(s) is found in violation of the law, the student(s) will be reported
to local authorities. If the student(s) is found in violation of a Major School Rule,
the student(s) would normally face a meeting with the Discipline Committee. As
with all discipline at the School, the Rector, in his authority, will decide on the
dispensation of discipline for student(s) who break the Major School Rules. If a
student(s) is found in violation of any of the Student Standards, the student(s)
will face appropriate disciplinary consequences.
The School expects that students will strive to act honorably and support one
another. To that end, there is a range of responses that allows students to help
one another and to get help for themselves without threat of disciplinary action.

Chapel
Both the Chapel of St. Peter and St. Paul and the Chapel of St. Paul (Old and
New Chapels) are sacred spaces, built and still used for worship purposes in
the Episcopal faith and now in other traditions as well. All who use the Chapels
should do so in a respectful manner, that protects not only the building itself,
but the fundamental purpose of the space, which is to provide a safe, spiritual
environment to help individuals to discern, grieve, ponder, and to love God and
love their neighbor.
The Chapel is an inclusive space that honors the Episcopal, interfaith, and secular
life of the School, and promotes the socio-emotional competencies in a tech-free
(during services) and loving environment. Students should refrain from bringing in
food and drink, using cell phones, using profane language or music, and climbing
over the rails to find their seats. Students who arrive after the doors have closed
for Daily Chapel at 8:30am should enter through the side door (by the statue of
St. Paul) and check in with the associate dean of students so that they are not
marked absent. Chapel absences will be recorded by faculty, and disputes can be
taken to the associate dean of students.
21

The Chapels are open throughout the day for those who want to come and pray,
reflect, play music, or meet. Specific requests and “holdings” on the Chapel space
should be approved by the Dean of Chapel, and booked through the Events Office.
According to long-standing tradition, our School opens the day with Chapel in
the Chapel of St. Peter and St. Paul (New Chapel) at 8:30 a.m., Monday, Tuesday,
Thursday, and Friday. In addition, the School gathers for an opening service at
the beginning of every term and for at least one Evensong each term. A regular
cycle of voluntary services is offered as well.
Chapel Announcements
To make an announcement in morning Chapel, you must submit the text of what
will be read. The text for Chapel announcements is due by 3:30 p.m. the previous afternoon for the following morning’s Chapel. Announcements for Monday
morning must be in by Friday at 3:30 p.m. Music or lighting requests must be
made 48 hours in advance and must be noted in the submission of your request.
In addition, on the day of your announcement, you will need to arrive by 8:10
a.m. with your music and be ready to review your announcement. Requests
for announcements may not be submitted in the morning at Chapel. If text is
not provided by the appropriate time, an announcement will not be made. Announcements will be checked for appropriateness and should be no longer than
approximately 30 seconds.
If your announcement contains information involving the use of any space at SPS,
be sure the use and scheduling of such space has been approved. To schedule a
space use the electronic form go to the Millville site at millville.sps.edu, “Log In,”
select “Apps” then “Events.” Questions regarding the space should be directed to
Ms. Ferman (ext. 4763 or bferman@sps.edu).
Skits may be an appropriate way to announce certain events. Skits must be requested by submitting a Chapel announcement (see below) at least two days in
advance. Skits must be previewed and approved by the Dean of Chapel one day
prior to the expected presentation.
Submitting a Chapel Announcement
To submit a Chapel announcement, go to the Millville site at millville.sps.edu,
“Log In,” select “Apps,” then “Chapel Announcements.” Complete the form in its
entirety, including the text of what will be read. You will receive a confirmation
that the announcement has been received and approved. Please check in with
Rev. Courtright prior to 8:30 a.m. in Chapel on the day of your announcement.
Chapel announcements will be e-mailed to the community after morning Chapel.

22

Clark House
The philosophy of Clark House is based on a developmental understanding of
early, middle and late adolescence. Each of these stages, for our 13 to 19 year olds,
requires specific knowledge related to their physical, cognitive, social, emotional
and moral growth. Kindness, courtesy, and humane discipline form the core values from which we provide nurturing care, while encouraging students to take
advantage of the School’s opportunities. We recognize the need for limits and
boundaries as well as offering a place for comfort. Clark House provides a relaxed,
quiet atmosphere in which students may recover from illness or injury as well as
develop a necessary and healthy balance in their lives.
Clark House is centrally located on the grounds of St. Paul’s School, across from
the Chapel and Ohrstrom Library and between the Rectory and Post Office, allowing for easy student access. Clark House consists of an inpatient and outpatient
wing, counseling offices, health resource library, conference room, and meditation
room. From this site, we provide and coordinate our medical, counseling and
wellness services.
Clark House health center provides medical and mental health care for students
enrolled at St. Paul’s School. While we cannot serve as a substitute for a child’s
primary care provider, we can offer resources that support students’ medical and
mental health needs in a private setting while they are at SPS. For acute situations that require specialty care, referrals can be made locally. If a student’s care
falls beyond what Clark House can provide, rendering the student(s) incapable
of functioning independently in this setting and/or jeopardizing his/her ability
to be safe to self and others, that student may be sent home for ongoing, more
specialized follow up. Students at St. Paul’s are expected to have the skills necessary to function independently at a fully residential school. These skills include
self‐management (self‐regulate sleep, time management, medication management,
accessing health care, and organizational skills), relationship skills and positive
decision‐making. When a student’s condition negatively impacts these areas of
functioning, a separation from the school until skill restoration may be warranted.
Parents can reach Clark House 24-hours-a-day by calling 603-229-4850 or
e-mailing anurse@sps.edu.
INFORMED CONSENT

As a condition of enrollment, parents and students are required to sign the Informed Consent form. This consent also authorizes a student’s participation in
health and wellness programs. Upon turning 18 years of age, as a condition of
continued enrollment, students are required to sign the Informed Consent which
then gives Clark House permission to discuss student’s medical care with their
parents or legal guardians.

23

HEALTH CENTER REPORTING

It is the policy of Clark House to comply with all applicable federal and state
reporting requirements. Clark House staff is knowledgeable on all applicable
reporting requirements including, but not limited to, requirements relating to
communicable diseases, child abuse, Safe School Zones, hazing, and injuries
caused by criminal acts. Clark House provides regular training to its staff on applicable reporting requirements and establishes internal procedures to facilitate
compliance. For more information, please refer to the St. Paul’s School Reporting
Expectations and New Hampshire Mandated Reporting Laws and your Informed
Consent form. When a mandatory report is required, Clark House staff will also
report the information internally to the vice rector for school life and the Dean
of Student’s Office.
CONFIDENTIALITY OF HEALTH-RELATED INFORMATION

Clark House personnel maintains the confidentiality of all health-related information within its care or custody. Clark House personnel will not release any
individually identifiable health-related information without written consent of
the parent or the student in cases where the student’s consent is required by law.
Clark House personnel will release health-related information if required to do
so by law (e.g. mandatory reporting).
As a condition of enrollment, parents and students must sign the School’s Informed
Consent policy, which allows the Medical Director to share limited information
on a need to know basis with employees of the school. To release information
to other agencies, parents and students must provide written consent to release
any medical or health information (including information related to drug/alcohol evaluation and random drug testing results) to the following (1) any health
care professional, including counselors providing treatment while the student is
attending St. Paul’s School; and (2) any persons necessary to process insurance
claims. Clark House will disclose only the minimum information necessary to
achieve the purpose for which it is released.
Clark House will maintain appropriate administrative, technical and physical
safeguards to protect the security of all health-related information within its care
or custody. Clark House will retain medical information for seven years[TF2]
after a student graduates, at which time paper information will be destroyed and
electronic information will be purged/erased.
St. Paul’s School can provide medical clearance only for programs that are affiliated
with the School. For all other programs and travel, domestic and foreign, please
refer the necessary forms to your child’s primary care provider.
REPORTING PERSONAL OR HEALTH-RELATED ABSENCES TO SCHOOL

Because of the confidential nature of personal or health-related absences, St. Paul’s
School leaves responses to such questions to the discretion of students and their
families. St. Paul’s School health officials may contact college health personnel with
24

information regarding a student’s condition, where appropriate, and with the consent
of the family. This contact is made after the college application process is completed.
The College Office strongly encourages students who have taken an extended
leave (more than three weeks) to submit a written explanation to the colleges
explaining the absence. This leave will also be reflected in the number of credits
on the student’s transcript. Students should review these statements with their
college adviser prior to submitting them to colleges.
MEDICAL SERVICES

Clark House is directed by a full‐time physician, board certified in family practice,
who is a member of the faculty and serves as Medical Director. In addition, a female health practitioner is available as needed to focus on young women’s health
issues. The health center is open seven days a week when school is in session and
is staffed 24 hours a day by registered nurses. Clark House has 14 patient beds,
8 of which are dedicated to in‐patient care and six for out‐patient rest and observation. Assessment and treatment are provided for routine, acute, and ongoing
concerns. Permanent AEDs (automated external defibrillators) are strategically
located throughout the grounds; portable AEDs are carried by our Safety officers
and athletic trainers. In addition, Concord Hospital, Dartmouth Hitchcock Clinic,
and Concord Orthopedics are less than a mile from the School’s entrance, which
allows for easy referral to a variety of specialists.
In order to provide safe, high‐quality treatment, the School must have on file all
medical information relating to each student. Parents and students must provide
the School with the following information/forms prior to attendance: proof of
insurance, Informed Consent, Physical Exam/Immunization Record, Health Record, Authorization for Medication, and Counseling Consent. As a condition of
enrollment, all forms must be completed, signed and received at Clark House by
their respective dates.
Students with plans to travel internationally, independent of an SPS‐sponsored
trip, are responsible for directly consulting with their personal physician or a
travel clinic to provide required/recommended immunizations. If these services
must be provided in the Concord or surrounding area, a three month notice is
required for Clark House to facilitate an appointment or referral. Clark House is
unable to provide this service as well as completing physical exams for outside
camps, sports, academic programs, and college forms.
STUDENT ILLNESS

Students can access Clark House health center 24 hours a day, 7 days a week
during the school year. During the day, we encourage students to schedule a time
or “walk‐ in” during a free period as to avoid missing class time or other commitments. If, however, a student is too ill to participate in their usual school activities, they can access the health center at any time. After a student has checked
into their house for the evening, if a student must access the health center, that
25

student should speak with an adviser and be accompanied to the health center
by an adult or call Safety at x4646 to be transported. If a student needs to access
care during the night, they should not leave their dorm room unaccompanied,
but instead should call Safety to be picked up at the dorm and then transported.
If a student is feeling ill and believes and needs to miss Chapel or first period, the
student should check in with Clark House by 7:30 a.m.
Once students are evaluated by medical staff, they may be asked to stay at Clark
House on “Health Center Bounds” or may be placed on “Dorm Room Bounds” if
the health center is experiencing higher than normal volume of inpatients. Students
on Dorm Room Bounds should be in their rooms resting, not attending classes or
participating in athletics or activities. Additional instructions may be given by the
staff, who will periodically check on the student’s well‐being. Finally, students who
stay overnight at Clark House are there for rest and recuperation. In our attempt
to help students get well, visitors will be limited, with visiting hours ending at 9
p.m. and lights out by 10:30 p.m. In order to support the student, Clark House
may contact a student’s house adviser regarding follow‐up care. While a student
is recovering at the health center, daily commitments are excused. We cannot
retroactively excuse absences nor can we excuse absences when a student is not
physically present at the health center. If students miss classes due to illness or
fatigue because they spent time in the health center or on “dorm room bounds”,
they cannot attend their athletic commitments for the day and will be asked to
return to Clark House for a study hall or will be asked to check into their dorm
early that evening.
COUNSELING SERVICES

As a condition of enrollment, students and their parents must review and sign the
counseling consent form which is included in health center forms on the parent
portal. Parents and students should read the form carefully and raise any questions with the counselors. Once students turn 18 years of age, they must sign the
counseling consent form.
The Director of Counseling Services oversees the equivalent of three full time
counselors who are available to meet with any student about any issue during
scheduled appointments, as urgent matters arise or for crisis intervention.
As trust is crucial in the counseling relationship, St. Paul’s School will make every
effort to protect a student’s privacy. To promote candor, St. Paul’s School asks that
parents respect the privacy of students who may not wish to share certain information about their counseling, even though under New Hampshire state law, parents
of children who are under age 18 years hold the privilege to see and release their
child’s medical records. The counselors must build trust with students to be able
to engage in any meaningful work and to that end, the student may not want to
immediately inform parents or advisers of their counseling visits. The counselors
work toward including parents and advisers.

26

SUPPORT SERVICES

In addition to counseling services, psychiatric consultation is available on a regular
basis at Clark House. The psychiatrist may be asked to evaluate, prescribe, and
monitor medication. All referrals to the psychiatrist must go through Clark House
counselors or the Medical Director; the School pays for these services.
An Episcopal minister is available for support and spiritual guidance. This faculty
member is involved in the School’s School community and may assist with adjustment issues, loss and bereavement, and spiritual concerns.
A part‐time consulting nutritionist is available for students seeking help in the
areas of healthy eating, weight loss, weight gain, sports nutrition, and/or eating
disorders.
St. Paul’s School employs two certified athletic trainers who are educated in the
prevention, evaluation, management, treatment, and rehabilitation of injuries. The
athletic trainers are responsible for providing medical coverage at practices and
games. There are two athletic training rooms located on the school grounds, one at
the Athletic & Fitness Center, and one at the Hockey Center. The athletic trainers
are available at these sites prior to, during and immediately following athletics.
CONCUSSIONS

The understanding, definition and management of concussions have significantly
changed over the past decade to encompass a wider range of injuries that may or
may not be the result of a direct blow to the head. What used to be thought of as
a simple “ding” may now be considered a concussion depending on associated
symptoms. Because of a growing body of evidence to suggest that the pediatric/
adolescent population 1) is more vulnerable to concussion, 2)may require a longer
period of recovery, and 3) may suffer more long term consequences, these guidelines for aggressive management of concussions were developed for the students
of St. Paul’s School. Much of the information obtained for this protocol comes
directly from the NH State Advisory Council on Sport‐Related Concussion and
the Consensus statement on concussion in sport‐the 5th international conference
on concussion in sport held in Berlin, October 2016 (The Berlin Consensus Statement, 2016). This St. Paul’s School concussion paper is meant to be a management
guideline only, realizing that each injury is unique, requiring a different evaluation
and treatment plan for each student. It is a basic set of guidelines for the students
at St. Paul’s School and will encompass diagnosis, treatment and return to learn
and play guidelines.
All new St. Paul’s School students will be required to take a baseline ImPact neurocognitive test, to be repeated every 1.5- 2 years. These tests will be reviewed by
the Medical Director and those felt to be aberrant will be repeated. The reason for
the baseline test is to have a comparison score in the event a student is injured
and a concussion is suspected. Educational materials will be provided to students

27

and coaches, defining concussions and discussing the importance of good post‐
concussion management. Parents of students will be provided with concussion‐
related information as well as highlights of the School’s concussion‐management
guidelines.
If a head injury is suspected during a sports event, the Medical Director or Athletic Trainer will perform a sideline evaluation. If a concussion is suspected, the
student will not be allowed to return to play that day, regardless of the amount
of time symptoms lasted. The student will then be sent to the health center for
further evaluation; “When in doubt, sit them out”. In a situation where a student
is injured off the field, they will be directed or taken to the health center where a
nurse will perform an evaluation and consult with the Medical Director. If after
the injury, a student’s symptoms persist, they may be asked to stay for a night or
two at the health center for physical and cognitive rest as this has been shown
to be beneficial with concussion recovery. A medical history and exam will take
place while the student is at the health center and if a diagnosis of concussion is
still uncertain, an ImPact test will be performed and used as another tool to assist
with the diagnosis. An ImPact test is never used in isolation to make the diagnosis
of concussion. In situations where a student suffers a significant head injury with
post concussive vomiting, worsening headache or declining neurologic symptoms,
an Emergency Room evaluation and/ or CT scan will be ordered.
It’s important that a concussion caused by a “big hit” may last a shorter duration
than one that was caused by a seemingly mild hit. Concussions are very individualized and each student may experience various degrees of symptoms, have different
durations of recovery and suffer unique side effects and as such, accommodations
during recovery are tailored to the individual. Typically a student who has suffered a concussion will get placed on “no sports” and will be granted temporary
academic accommodations that will be communicated with the student’s teachers
through the Director of Academic Support. All teachers are educated on our Return
to Learn Protocol and are given a flyer of the protocol to post in their classroom
for reference. As the student progresses through recovery, the incremental changes
in recovery that translate to improving levels on the Return to Learn Protocol
will be communicated with teachers. Once the student has progressed through
the protocol and is fully participating in classes, the temporary academic accommodations will be removed and they will be directed to start their Return to Play
Protocol, which will prepare them to return to sports.
STUDENT TEACHER ASSISTANCE TEAM (STAT)

The vice rector for school life oversees the Student Teacher Assistance Team
(STAT). STAT is a group that meets to problem‐solve academic, social, behavioral
or health-related issues. These concerns can be student specific or relevant to the
entire community and may include such issues as health leave, drug or alcohol
use, unhealthy eating patterns, community disruption, learning issues, time
management, attendance issues or academic difficulties. The team, which acts
as a resource, is composed of core members that represent a variety of support
28

units within the School (Dean of Students Office, student adviser, Clark House
counselor, medical director, dean of academics, director of academic support and
the vice rector for school life). Additional members are added as needed, such
as a chaplain, or teacher(s). A referral to this problem-solving team can be made
to the Dean of Students Office by anyone including a parent, faculty members,
adviser or student. The team approach to a student’s difficulties allows input from
multiple individuals along with conversation with parents so recommendations
can be made to improve the situation for the student.
HEALTH POLICIES

Clark House is governed by policies established by the School’s Board of Trustees.
These policies include the following: Communicable Diseases, Health Center Reporting, Drug and Alcohol Testing, Life Threatening Situations, Self-Destructive
Behavior, Reproductive Health Confidentiality of Health-Related Information,
Management of Student Medications, and Health leave.
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES

St. Paul’s School is committed to providing a safe and effective educational and
working environment for its students, employees and visitors. Consistent with
this commitment is the policy to educate the community about how to prevent
and control the spread of communicable diseases. St. Paul’s School will comply
with all federal and state laws concerning the prevention and control of communicable diseases. In addition, it will abide by rules issued by the New England
Preparatory School Athletic Council (NEPSAC) for the control of communicable
diseases in athletic competition.
The School provides education about communicable diseases to its students and
employees on the nature of disease transmission and prevention through the
Living in Community program, OSHA training, and informally through literature and postings. A list of communicable diseases which are reportable to the
State of NH Bureau of Communicable Disease Control is available through Clark
House. The Medical Director at Clark House will make a determination about
the communicability of an infection and will make recommendations about isolation, precautions, and control measures to be implemented by St. Paul’s School.
Any incidence of a reportable communicable disease will be reported to the NH
Bureau of Communicable Diseases Control by the Medical Director. If a student
for religious reasons has opted out of state mandated immunizations, the School
reserves the right to send that child home during an outbreak of an immunization
preventable illness.
*According to New Hampshire law RSA 141‐C, a communicable disease is “an illness
due to an infectious agent or its toxic products, which may be transmitted directly or
indirectly to any person from an infected person, animal, or arthropod or through the
vehicle of an intermediate host, vector or the inanimate environment”.

29

SELF-DESTRUCTIVE BEHAVIOR

It is the policy of St. Paul’s School to maintain a safe learning and living environment for its students, staff, and faculty. Since self‐destructive behavior is a threat
to the School’s ability to maintain a safe environment, it is the policy of the School
to respond to all such behavior by students. For the purposes of this policy, self‐
destructive behavior is defined as behavior that may include, but is not limited
to, the following:
• an inability to control one’s own actions; or
• bodily harm to oneself, including the overdose of drugs or any other suicide
attempt/threat/gesture.
When a determination has been made that a student has engaged in self‐destructive behavior, the student will be placed on a short‐term or extended health leave
in accordance with the School Health leave Policy. If a student is found to be in
a situation where they are in danger of harming self or others, Clark House will
immediately contact SPS Safety, the Medical Director, the Dean on Duty and/or
the Concord Police Department as appropriate. Clark[TF3] House personnel are
not authorized to use physical or chemical restraints at any time.
LIFE-THREATENING SITUATIONS

Students, faculty, or staff witnessing or coming upon a life‐threatening situation
should call 911 immediately and then notify the Health Center and School Safety
(4646). Students should always attempt to contact an adult for assistance when
possible. Examples of life-threatening situations include:
• acute respiratory distress
• severe bleeding
• shock/anaphylactic reaction
• cardiac distress
• burns – serious/extensive
• poisoning
• unconsciousness
• injury involving large bones/severe head/neck trauma/paralysis
• natural or other disasters
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH

St. Paul’s School seeks to affirm and support young people in their search for appropriate expressions of intimacy and affection. The School is aware, however,
of the serious physical, emotional, social, and legal consequences that can result
from intimate sexual contact. Therefore, the School strongly encourages students
to postpone sexual intimacy.
However, St. Paul’s School is aware that students will make their own decisions
about sexual intimacy. Clark House professional staff and faculty are available to
30

all students who want to discuss reproductive health and other related issues.
In addition, with parental permission, Clark House medical staff may provide
reproductive health services to students. If a student is seeking medical attention
outside the scope of care that can be provided at the health center, there are other
resources locally to which they can be referred or directed.
EATING DISORDERS

At St. Paul’s School we seek to foster the emotional and physical well‐being of
students. In keeping with this ideal we realize the intense need students may have
for support and education around the topics of weight, body image, disordered
eating, food preoccupation, and exercise obsession.
Eating disorders are serious medical problems. Anorexia nervosa, bulimia and
binge eating are all types of disorders that typically develop during adolescence
and adulthood or less frequently in childhood. Eating disorders affect both men
and women. While eating disorders are less common in men, approximately 10
percent of those suffering from eating disorders are male.
To address eating disorders, St. Paul’s School, through Clark House, has developed
a support and intervention system. The goal is not only to treat students with eating disorders but also to enhance prevention of these disorders through education
and community support. We are guided by the well‐researched protocols outlined
in the manual developed at Dartmouth College Health Service (the “Dartmouth
Manual”) to assist us in providing a high quality of care for students with eating
disorders in light of the School’s resources. A copy of the Dartmouth Manual is
available upon request.
The Dartmouth Manual provides specific treatment and health leave recommendations for students identified with eating disorders. In brief, any student identified as exhibiting behavior consistent with disordered eating will have an initial
evaluation at Clark House to assess the extent of the problem. This assessment
will usually include appointments with several members of our multi- disciplinary team, including the medical Director, a counselor, a nutritionist, and in some
instances our consulting psychiatrist. Specific treatment and nutrition goals will
be set for the outpatient program, and, in most instances, the student will be given
a period of time to demonstrate improvement as determined by members of the
health professional team. However, if the School determines that the student’s
current situation falls outside the scope of care that Clark House can effectively
provide, the student will be required to take a health leave from school. If the
student in the opinion of the medical Director or a treating physician exhibits a
significant decline in emotional or physical health at any time, the student may
be required to take a leave prior to the term’s completion. A health leave may also
be required. if a student has a history of an eating disorder combined with one
or more of the following: 1) physiological signs or symptoms of health decline
indicated by (including but not limited to) abnormal laboratory tests, persistent
amenorrhea in females, dental erosions, low blood pressure, low pulse, other
31

cardiac abnormalities, etc.; 2) while in treatment, an inability to maintain a body
mass index (BMI) of at least 18 and/or an ideal body weight of at least >80%; 3) an
inability to break the cycle of chronic eating disordered behavior; 4) an inability
to engage in or comply with any aspect of the effective outpatient therapy at SPS;
5) the needs or care of the individual exceed what the School determines it can
effectively provide; or 6) the student’s eating behaviors or results of the disordered
eating unreasonably disrupts the School community.
In addition to the above, a required health leave for students with anorexia nervosa
may be based on an ideal body weight (IBW) of <80% or a body mass index (BMI)
of <18%. If a medical leave is necessary, then a returning weight which reflects a
BMI of at least 19.5% (equivalent to an IBW between 96-98% for females and 90%
for males reflecting different body compositions between males and females) is
the goal as this BMI standard for completion of a medical leave is associated with
lower relapse rates. These weights must be maintained for a minimum of three
months prior to gaining medical clearance to return.
For students who are identified as having bulimia, treatment recommendations
will be based on physiological signs and severity of illness. As with students who
have anorexia nervosa, it may be determined that a health leave is warranted in
order to address the issues related to bulimia, particularly if it is determined by the
team that the student’s needs are beyond what the School can effectively provide.
Students with bulimia who have gone on a health leave must demonstrate an ability
to maintain a healthy weight, stable eating patterns, and management of bingepurge symptoms for at least three months prior to gaining medical clearance to
return to St. Paul’s School. Other medical symptoms, (i.e., laboratory abnormalities,
abnormal vital signs, cardiac abnormalities, etc.) must also be stable and within
normal limits for three months prior to a student’s return.
Because excessive exercise is not uncommon in students with eating disorders, a
restriction on athletics/exercise may be implemented or the student may be required
to take a medical withdrawal if the student fails to meet the goals established by
the treatment team.
If a determination is made that a student’s health is significantly compromised
due to an eating disorder or disordered eating and the student refuses to accept
a medical recommendation for a voluntary health leave, the dean of students in
collaboration with medical input may, on an individualized basis, implement an
involuntary health leave. Whether or not a health leave is voluntary or involuntary,
SPS may impose weight goals and limits on an individualized basis, taking into
account factors such as the student’s compliance with treatment recommendations, weight history, height, frame size, family history, rapidity of weight change
and eating/exercise behavior which must be fulfilled prior to the student’s return.
Upon matriculation to St. Paul’s School or prior to the onset of a new school year,
if a student has an active eating disorder as determined by, but not limited to,
health records, statements made by the student and/or family, or by the student’s
32

home physician(s) and/or counselor(s), the student’s parents must authorize SPS
officials to confer with the student’s medical professional(s). If after such consultation, SPS reasonably believes that the student’s health is sufficiently at risk of being
compromised, the dean of students, in consultation with the Medical Director and
the Director of Counseling Services, may recommend or impose a health leave
of absence. The dean of students will consider a range of factors, including but
not limited to: a history of poor treatment compliance; an eating disorder not in
remission; stability of an eating disorder of less than three months in duration;
treatment needs beyond what St. Paul’s School can effectively provide; or information that reasonably suggests that attending a residential boarding school would
present a legitimate health or safety risk to the student.
As with all health leaves, documentation of improvement from treating health
care professionals will be required prior to consideration of a return to St. Paul’s.
For all students subject to a health leave for eating disorders, a period of a minimum of three months of documented recovery and health as determined by St.
Paul’s School, is required before a return to the School will be permitted. As per
the Dartmouth Manual, St. Paul’s School adheres to specific BMI criteria that a
student must meet prior to being eligible to participation in athletics. Although
the health care team at Clark House values and requires input from outside health
professionals during the student’s health leave, ultimately the decision to allow a
student to return rests exclusively with the dean of students in close consultation
with the treatment team and the Medical Director.
SLEEP DEPRIVATION

Although there is no formal policy for sleep deprivation, on occasion students
request rest at the health center. Students are asked if they have any tests, quizzes,
assignments or assignments due; if so, they are directed to their respective commitment, and once it is completed, may return to sleep if they choose. Students
who have nothing due are allowed to one of our day-beds for rest. Students with
sleep deprivation are placed on “no sports” for that day”, and expected to return
to Clark House for a study hall in the afternoon. Students may also be placed
on “early check”, which is communicated to the student and their house. In the
event that students misuse sleep deprivation, they will be required to meet with
the Medical Director. It is appropriate for faculty and advisers to remind students
of the need for sleep, particularly those students who may overuse the health
center to get rest.
Sleep Deprivation Study Hall
Located in Clark House, sleep deprivation study hall is designed for students
who spend time sleeping during the day in the health center and therefore, miss
academic commitments. The goal of this study hall is to allow structured time for
students to catch up on missed assignments.

33

MANAGEMENT OF STUDENT MEDICATIONS

Appropriate management of medication is required by New Hampshire Code of
Administrative Rules He-P816.17. The Medical Director and/or nursing staff at
St. Paul’s School Clark House will store, administer, and/or oversee the use of all
medications by students. Clark House must be notified of all medications that a
student is taking, including prescribed, over-the counter, herbal, dietary supplements, vitamins, minerals, performance enhancers or other medications. Any
student who takes prescribed medications to treat a psychological or learningrelated disorder shall receive counseling or supervision as deemed appropriate
by the Medical Director or counseling services. All procedures for managing and
distributing medication(s) will follow federal and state laws. Prescription, nonprescription and nutritional supplements may not be mailed directly to students,
but must be mailed or delivered directly to Clark House.
Parent Disclosure and Releases
As a condition of enrollment, parents and students are required to disclose to
medical personnel at Clark House any and all medications used by the student.
Parents and students must also advise Clark House medical personnel of any
changes in the student’s medications, including dosage. All medication records
will be maintained at Clark House.
Distribution
All opiate, stimulant, and other ADHD medications as well as pyschotropics for
depression/anxiety and other mental health illnesses cannot be stored in a student’s
room and must be housed and administered on a dose-by-dose basis by authorized
personnel at Clark House. Clark House personnel recognize that there are some
emergency medications that a student might need to carry medication. On occasion, the Medical Director can also authorize distribution of one to two doses of
the above medications for nighttime use as described in the text that follows. No
St. Paul’s faculty or staff member may be given the responsibility/authorization to
administer prescribed medications to any student on campus. Failure of a student
to follow this policy may result in a disciplinary response which may include, but
is not limited to, dismissal from the School.
When off grounds on a School-sponsored trip where a chaperone is present, or
when on grounds when School is not in session and the health center is closed,
a chaperone who has had proper training in medication administration will be
allowed to hold and securely store a student’s opiate, psychotropic or stimulant
medication. The medication will be provided to the student by the chaperone as
indicated on the Medication Administration Record (MAR). The chaperone will
document on the MAR whether the student took the medication (directly observed) or refused it. At the end of the trip, the chaperone will give the remaining
medication to the student if school is not in session or return it to Clark House
if the student is returning to campus. All MARs will be returned to Clark House
by the chaperone. All students are required to return medications from travel,
holidays and vacations to Clark House within 24 hours of returning to campus.
34

Failure to follow this policy may result in a disciplinary response, which may
include, but is not limited to, dismissal from the School. The Medical Director
will be notified of any failure to return narcotic/opiate, psychotropic or stimulant
medications to Clark House.
To insure the School’s medication policy is understood, students and parents of
students taking any opiate, psychotropic or stimulant medications must sign the
St. Paul’s School Medication Compliance Policy agreement form. While Clark
House will work with students to manage their medications, we cannot force
students to take their prescribed medications nor will Clark House notify students
and their parents of any missed medication. It is expected that St. Paul’s School
students will be able to self-manage their medication compliance. Ultimately, the
responsibility to take a medication is up to the student and the student’s family.
The following is a description of the various medications subject to this policy and
description of the requirements pertaining to them.
Non-Prescription Medications
Students taking non-prescription medications, dietary supplements, vitamins
or herbal remedies shall inform the medical staff about the type of medication
dietary supplements, vitamins or herbal remedies they are using and the dosage
amount. Examples include acetaminophen, ibuprofen, cough syrups, decongestants and others.
Students may store and self-administer these medications with parental permission.
Topical Prescribed Medications and Certain Oral Prescribed Medications
Topically applied creams for the treatment of acne, dermatitis and oral antibiotics, oral medications for the treatment of allergies, oral contraceptives and other
medications that are not opiate, psychotropic or stimulant medications, may be
kept in a student’s room with parental permission and, with the authorization
from the Medical Director, the student may self-administer. Examples include:
Differin cream, Minocycline, Accutane, Claritin, Allegra, Zyrtec, birth control pills,
Bactrim, Penicillin, Zithromax, Synthroid, Metformin and others.
Emergency Medications
Emergency medications are those which a student needs to carry at all times.
Examples include, but are not limited to, asthma inhalers, epinephrine autoinjectors, insulin and others. Students will be allowed to carry such medication
with permission of the parent and authorization from the Medical Director. By
signing the Acknowledgment Regarding Medication consent, parents and/or legal
guardians give St. Paul’s School and its designees the authority to administer emergency medications, like Epi-Pens for suspected severe allergic reactions, nebulized
bronchodilators for asthma attacks, or naloxone for suspected opiate overdose.

35

Opiate, Stimulant and Psychotropic Medications
These medications MUST be housed and administered by authorized Clark House
medical staff on a dose-by-dose basis. Students will not be allowed to keep a
supply of these medications in their rooms.
Examples of opiates include Codeine, Vicodin, Percocet, Oxycodone and others.
Examples of a stimulant medication include Adderall, Ritalin, Concerta, Vyvanse
and others.
Examples of Psychotropic medications include Zoloft, Prozac, Strattera, Lexapro,
Wellbutrin, Xanax, Celexa and others.
In addition, all students who are prescribed psychotropic medications will be
required to meet with the School’s Medical Director, counselor, or consulting
psychiatrist during the school year to discuss treatment planning for the upcoming
year. The treatment plan may include regular counseling and medication during
the school year. As part of the treatment planning process, we may discuss and coordinate the student’s diagnostic testing and care with the student’s home provider,
including any prescribing physician, evaluator or therapist. We ask that parents
facilitate this process to ensure coordinated care between the School and home.
Revocation of Self-Administration Privileges
St. Paul’s School reserves the right to revoke a student’s right to self-administer
medication when, in the professional judgment of Clark House medical staff, the
student has demonstrated an inability to self-medicate safely.
Failure to Comply
All students must comply with the School’s policy on medication management.
Failure to comply with this policy is a violation of a major school expectation and
may result in disciplinary action against the student including, but not limited
to, separation from the School. Clark House personnel will notify parents of a
student’s failure to comply with this policy.
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING

Students are expected to be completely drug and alcohol free while they are enrolled at St. Paul’s School. They may not sell, distribute, use, possess, or be under
the influence of illicit drugs, alcohol, nicotine or other substances that are used
in a way other than prescribed. As a condition of the student’s enrollment at St.
Paul’s School, parent(s) and students are required to authorize the School to conduct drug and alcohol testing of the student by a urine or hair sample or saliva.
St. Paul’s School reserves the right to test students for drugs and alcohol randomly
or in the following circumstances: (1) the student exhibits drug or alcohol influenced behavior; (2) the student has a history of drug or alcohol use at St. Paul’s
School; (3) there are significant changes in the student’s academic or social functioning; (4) there are signs of psychological distress; or (5) upon written request
by the parent(s) of the student.
36

If a student has been caught using a substance or has admitted through the School’s
Sanctuary Policy to have used, the student will be placed on a list to be randomly
tested. Each week several students from the list will be selected through a random
number generator to undergo one of the methods of drug testing at the family’s
expense. If, during the school year, a student is randomly selected more than 10
times, the School will incur the cost of further testing.
If a student tests positive for illicit substances, whether or not it can be demonstrated that the substance was used on the grounds, the student is considered to be
in violation of a Major School Rule, and will be subject to appropriate disciplinary
action, up to and including separation from the School.
Parents will be responsible for all costs incurred for evaluation, counseling, and
drug testing services provided through Clark House.
SANCTUARY POLICY FOR INTERVENTION

The Sanctuary Policy for Intervention creates an avenue for helping students engaged in high-risk behavior without the threat of disciplinary action. The adults
of our community keep as a top priority the safety and health of the students and
urge students to use this policy to help themselves or others they feel are at risk.
Sanctuary may be invoked when:
• a student brings to an adult, the Health Center, or the dean of students an
at-risk student and/or information concerning risky behavior by the student
or another student, that would not otherwise be available to adults, or
• an adult refers to the Health Center or the dean of students a student whom
is suspected to be engaged in an on-going high-risk behavior.
A student under the protection of the Sanctuary Policy is obligated to communicate
openly and honestly with the adults working with the student.
RESPONSES TO AN INTERVENTION

Response to the first episode will include notification of the student’s parents,
adviser, and head of house, student submission to a risk-behavior evaluation,
counseling, and if relevant, regular drug/alcohol testing.
A second episode will require an off-site risk-behavior evaluation, counseling, and
completion of a drug/alcohol rehabilitation treatment program. The student can
return to school only after the STAT team is convinced that the student demonstrates sufficient recovery and rehabilitation.
Exceptions
Situations in which an adult finds a student engaged in risky behavior will not
be covered by the Sanctuary Policy, though the student can invoke the Sanctuary
Policy for others involved in such behavior by providing their names, unless adults
would have otherwise learned this information.
37

Students should note that egregious situations, for example those involving harm
to another student, hazing, coercion, or the sale of controlled drugs will not be
covered by the Sanctuary Policy. Students who are currently participants in the
drug and alcohol testing program may not invoke sanctuary when a faculty member
has engaged them to be tested.
It is important to note that if the School comes into the possession of a controlled
drug in the context of a sanctuary, it is still required to make a report to the police
who may then follow up with the student. The student(s) involved would not
face internal disciplinary consequences (sanctuary still applies), but they may
face external legal consequences.
The Sanctuary policy is not intended to cover behaviors that do not threaten the
health and safety of a student, such as academic dishonesty.
ADMINISTRATION OF SANCTUARY

As a health -based response, sanctuaries are administered by personnel at the Clark
House health center. While the dean of students, head of house and adviser of
students who are sanctuaried are notified, Clark House communicates the details
of sanctuary cases to the parents/guardians of the student concerned.

Leaves of Absence and Returning from Leaves
Sometimes issues can arise in the course of a student’s career at the School that
may interfere with the student’s ability to engage constructively in the business
of learning. On these occasions, a student may be required to stay in the health
center or to leave St. Paul’s temporarily, usually to return home. The School’s leaveof-absence policy acknowledges that time away from campus can be important.
Therefore, the School allows students to remain in good standing while taking
the time they need to address important personal issues away from the school
and with their families. When it is determined that the student can return, the
student’s head of house, adviser, and parents, the Office of Academic Affairs, and
the Dean of Students Office will be informed.
Under critical circumstances decisions about leaves may be made by the Dean of
Students Office or Clark House medical team unilaterally. However, The Student
Teacher Assistance Team (STAT) determines the duration of leaves and the conditions necessary for a student’s return. The factors considered in making these
determinations are the student’s clinical needs, safety, impact on the safety and
well-being of the community, and the capacity to comply with the essential elements of student and academic life, as well as the community’s ability to provide
appropriate care and supervision.
A student and their parents may request a leave of absence for a variety of reasons.

38

HEALTH LEAVE

There are three types of health leaves, each based on the amount of time the
student is absent from School:
• Short Term Health Leave is defined as an approved absence from School for
health reasons lasting no longer than three weeks.
• Long Term Health Leave is defined as an approved absence from School for
health reasons that last longer than three weeks but less than one academic
year.
• Health Separation is defined as an absence from School for health reasons
that will require more than one calendar year.
1. A health leave may be required for medical reasons when, in order to ensure
effective management or treatment of a medical or mental health concern,
a student must be away from school for a period of time. St. Paul’s School is
committed to providing access to an appropriate level of health care. In some
cases a student’s health needs may exceed the limits of what Clark House
can provide. In those situations, a student may be placed on a Health leave.
A Health leave may also be necessary if a student is in danger of harming
themselves or someone else or is disrupting the community.
2. A leave may be required for a diagnostic evaluation or treatment, or it may
be initiated when a student’s presence on campus might jeopardize their own
health or compromise the well-being of others. A health leave is granted or
required for the management of health issues that cannot be adequately treated
by the School or through local providers. A health leave may last up to one
year in duration and is not an instrument of discipline.
3. A health leave will be required if it is determined, based upon individualized
assessment by the medical Director and/or the Director of counseling that,
in their professional judgment, a student has exhibited suicidal behavior or
behavior considered to be suicidal or otherwise potentially life-threatening,
posing a risk of harm to the student and/or others. It is our experience that a
clearly defined and extended period of time permits students to focus, with
their families, on the steps needed to regain their equilibrium and to thrive.
4. A health leave may be required following any situation of egregious or repeated
self-injury, including but not limited to drug and alcohol ingestion, a severe
eating disorder, or cutting.
5. A health leave may be required if a student does not possess the essential
skills to function independently in a residential school (see Functional Skill
Expectations) including self-management, relationship skills and positive
decision making.
6. A dean’s leave may be required in cases in which a student is unable to meet
school obligations (academic, attendance, or residential) or in cases in which
the needs of the student cannot be met by the community and/or are interfering with the well-being of others. When a student is unable to meet the
39

school’s expectations (including compliance with a previously determined
treatment plan), a leave of absence will be required.
7. A dean’s leave may be required in cases involving extenuating circumstance,
as determined by the dean of students.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE PROCEDURES

Procedures
The Medical Director or the Director of Counseling Services determines whether
or not a student at St. Paul’s School will be required to take or will be granted
a health leave. Prior to making a determination the Medical Director or the Director of Counseling Services will normally seek information about the student
from a variety of sources that may include the student, the student’s adviser, the
student’s family and friends, and other medical care providers at the School and
outside of the School.
When the Medical Director or the Director of Counseling Services determines that
a student will be leaving for a health leave, the Medical Director or the Director
of Counseling Services will inform all involved persons including the student
affected, head of house, adviser, parents, the Dean of Students Office, and the
Office of Academic Affairs.
The Office of Academic Affairs will contact the teachers of the student and, if
appropriate under the circumstances, the Office of Academic Affairs will formulate a plan for continuing academic work and communication of these academic
expectations for the student.
As soon as is reasonably possible, the Medical Director or the Director of Counseling Services in conjunction with the Dean Of Students Office may convene a
Student Teacher Assistance Team (STAT) meeting to discuss and determine the
appropriate length of the health leave and to establish conditions for the student’s
return to St. Paul’s. After this meeting, these conditions for return will be communicated to the parents/guardian of the student.
The Medical Director or the Director of Counseling Services will need to communicate with the professionals involved with the care and treatment of the
student while the student is on leave and will follow-up over the course of the
health leave. A parent/guardian must arrange for copies of all treatment records,
evaluations and psychological or medical testing to be provided to the Medical
Director or the Director of Counseling Services upon request in a timely fashion.
Requests for return to the School should be communicated to the Medical Director
or the Director of Counseling Services and should include documentation demonstrating that the conditions of the health leave have been satisfied. The Medical
Director or the Director of Counseling Services will then reconvene the STAT to
review the situation and the factors of the student’s care away from school and
determine whether a return to St. Paul’s is appropriate. It is the responsibility of
the STAT team to determine whether a return to St. Paul’s is appropriate when the
40

student has been on leave. The Medical Director and the Director of Counseling
Services will determine if a return is appropriate from a health perspective but
the team will consider all relevant information including, but not limited to, the
student’s ability to meet the minimal functional capacities.
If a return is approved, the student may spend a night or several nights in residence
at Clark House as a transition back to school life. The student must also abide by
any conditions set forth by the STAT team to help ensure continued good health
and the ability to meet minimal functional expectations.
The Office of Academic Affairs will contact the teachers of the student and, if appropriate under the circumstances, will formulate a plan for continuing academic
work and for the communication of these academic expectations to the student
and the student’s adviser and teachers. Typically, if a student is away for fewer than
three weeks of the term, the student will receive academic credit for that term.
Absences that extend beyond three weeks in one term result in no credit received
for the term unless there are extenuating circumstances that call for alternative
credit designations.
RETURN FROM LEAVE

Readmission of a student after a leave of absence is not automatic, but depends
upon the student meeting certain criteria specified by the STAT in writing when
the leave is granted. Any conditions or behavioral expectations placed on the
student upon return from a leave must be fully met. If they are not, the student
will return to a leave-of-absence status.
ILL AT HOME

If it is suspected that a student will be sick for only a few days with a limited illness like influenza, a bad upper respiratory infection, strep throat, anxiety or a
host of other short lived illnesses, they may be allowed to go home and recover
instead of spending the nights in Clark House. Typically, the designation “Ill at
Home” will allow students to stay at home for a few nights and return when they
are better. During the time away from School, they are required to keep up with
their assignments or make arrangements with their teachers upon their return to
make up their work. They should work with their advisers to communicate their
illness with their teachers. If a student’s illness lasts longer than expected, the
Medical Director or Director of Counseling Services can change the designation
of “Ill at Home” to a “Health Leave” which is described above.

41

PATIENTS’ BILL OF RIGHTS

Mandated by RSA 151:21
New Hampshire law requires that the Patients’ Bill of Rights be made available to
all persons accessing Clark House. The Patients’ Bill of Rights appears below and
also is posted at Clark House. The policy describing the rights and responsibilities
of each patient admitted to the facility shall include, as a minimum, the following:
I. The patient shall be treated with consideration, respect, and full recognition of
the patient’s dignity and individuality, including privacy in treatment and personal
care and including being informed of the name, licensure status, and staff position
of all those with whom the patient has contact, pursuant to RSA 151:3-b.
II. The patient shall be fully informed of a patient’s rights and responsibilities and
of all procedures governing patient conduct and responsibilities. This information must be provided orally and in writing before or at admission, except for
emergency admissions. Receipt of the information must be acknowledged by the
patient in writing. When a patient lacks the capacity to make informed judgments
the signing must be by the person legally responsible for the patient.
III. The patient shall be fully informed in writing in language that the patient
can understand, before or at the time of admission and as necessary during the
patient’s stay, of the facility’s basic per diem rate and of those services included
and not included in the basic per diem rate. A statement of services that are not
normally covered by medicare or medicaid shall also be included in this disclosure.
IV. The patient shall be fully informed by a health care provider of his or her medical condition, health care needs, and diagnostic test results, including the manner
by which such results will be provided and the expected time interval between
testing and receiving results, unless medically inadvisable and so documented in
the medical record, and shall be given the opportunity to participate in the planning of his or her total care and medical treatment, to refuse treatment, and to be
involved in experimental research upon the patient’s written consent only. For the
purposes of this paragraph “health care provider’’ means any person, corporation,
facility, or institution either licensed by this state or otherwise lawfully providing
health care services, including, but not limited to, a physician, hospital or other
health care facility, dentist, nurse, optometrist, podiatrist, physical therapist, or
psychologist, and any officer, employee, or agent of such provider acting in the
course and scope of employment or agency related to or supportive of health
care services.
V. The patient shall be transferred or discharged after appropriate discharge planning only for medical reasons, for the patient’s welfare or that of other patients,
if the facility ceases to operate, or for nonpayment for the patient’s stay, except
as prohibited by Title XVIII or XIX of the Social Security Act. No patient shall be
involuntarily discharged from a facility because the patient becomes eligible for
medicaid as a source of payment.
42

VI. The patient shall be encouraged and assisted throughout the patient’s stay
to exercise the patient’s rights as a patient and citizen. The patient may voice
grievances and recommend changes in policies and services to facility staff or
outside representatives free from restraint, interference, coercion, discrimination,
or reprisal.
VII. The patient shall be permitted to manage the patient’s personal financial affairs.
If the patient authorizes the facility in writing to assist in this management and
the facility so consents, the assistance shall be carried out in accordance with the
patient’s rights under this subdivision and in conformance with state law and rules.
VIII. The patient shall be free from emotional, psychological, sexual and physical abuse and from exploitation, neglect, corporal punishment and involuntary
seclusion.
IX. The patient shall be free from chemical and physical restraints except when
they are authorized in writing by a physician for a specific and limited time necessary to protect the patient or others from injury. In an emergency, restraints may
be authorized by the designated professional staff member in order to protect the
patient or others from injury. The staff member must promptly report such action
to the physician and document same in the medical records.
X. The patient shall be ensured confidential treatment of all information contained
in the patient’s personal and clinical record, including that stored in an automatic
data bank, and the patient’s written consent shall be required for the release of
information to anyone not otherwise authorized by law to receive it. Medical
information contained in the medical records at any facility licensed under this
chapter shall be deemed to be the property of the patient. The patient shall be
entitled to a copy of such records upon request. The charge for the copying of a
patient’s medical records shall not exceed $15 for the first 30 pages or $.50 per
page, whichever is greater; provided, that copies of filmed records such as radiograms, x-rays, and sonograms shall be copied at a reasonable cost.
XI. The patient shall not be required to perform services for the facility. Where
appropriate for therapeutic or diversional purposes and agreed to by the patient,
such services may be included in a plan of care and treatment.
XII. The patient shall be free to communicate with, associate with, and meet privately with anyone, including family and resident groups, unless to do so would
infringe upon the rights of other patients. The patient may send and receive
unopened personal mail. The patient has the right to have regular access to the
unmonitored use of a telephone.
XIII. The patient shall be free to participate in activities of any social, religious,
and community groups, unless to do so would infringe upon the rights of other
patients.

43

XIV. The patient shall be free to retain and use personal clothing and possessions
as space permits, provided it does not infringe on the rights of other patients.
XV. The patient shall be entitled to privacy for visits and, if married, to share a
room with his or her spouse if both are patients in the same facility and where both
patients consent, unless it is medically contraindicated and so documented by a
physician. The patient has the right to reside and receive services in the facility
with reasonable accommodation of individual needs and preferences, including
choice of room and roommate, except when the health and safety of the individual
or other patients would be endangered.
XVI. The patient shall not be denied appropriate care on the basis of race, religion,
color, national origin, sex, age, disability, marital status, or source of payment,
nor shall any such care be denied on account of the patient’s sexual orientation.
XVII. The patient shall be entitled to be treated by the patient’s physician of choice,
subject to reasonable rules and regulations of the facility regarding the facility’s
credentialing process.
XVIII. The patient shall be entitled to have the patient’s parents, if a minor, or
spouse, or next of kin, or a personal representative, if an adult, visit the facility,
without restriction, if the patient is considered terminally ill by the physician
responsible for the patient’s care.
XIX. The patient shall be entitled to receive representatives of approved organizations as provided in RSA 151:28.
XX. The patient shall not be denied admission to the facility based on medicaid
as a source of payment when there is an available space in the facility.
XXI. Subject to the terms and conditions of the patient’s insurance plan, the patient
shall have access to any provider in his or her insurance plan network and referral
to a provider or facility within such network shall not be unreasonably withheld
pursuant to RSA 420-J:8, XIV.
Source: 1981, 453:1. 1989, 43:1. 1990, 18:1-6; 140:2, XI. 1991, 365:10. 1992, 78:1.
1997, 108:6; 331:3-8. 1998, 199:2; 388:5, 6. 2001, 85:1, eff. Aug. 18, 2001. 2009,
252:1, eff. Sept. 14, 2009. 2013, 265:3, eff. Jan. 1, 2014.
MENTAL HEALTH BILL OF RIGHTS

“This Mental Health Bill of Rights is provided by law to persons receiving mental
health services in the State of New Hampshire. Its purpose is to protect the rights
and enhance the wellbeing of clients, by informing them of key aspects of the
clinical relationship. As a client of a New Hampshire Mental Health Practitioner,
you have, without asking, the right:
(1) To be treated in a professional, respectful, competent and ethical manner consistent with all applicable state laws and the following professional ethical standards:
a. for psychologists, the American Psychological Association;
44

b. for independent clinical social workers; the National Association of Social
Workers;
c. for pastoral psychotherapists; the American Association of Pastoral Counselors
d. for clinical mental health counselors; the American Mental Health Counselor
Association; and
e. for marriage and family therapists; the American Association for Marriage
and Family Therapists.
(2) To receive full information about your treatment provider’s knowledge, skills,
experience and credentials.
(3) To have the information you disclose to your mental health provider kept
confidential within the limits of state and federal law. Communications between
mental health providers and clients are typically confidential, unless the law
requires their disclosure. Mental health providers will inform you of the legal
exceptions to confidentiality, and should such an exception arise, will share only
such information as required by law. Examples of such exceptions include but
are not limited to:
a. abuse of a child;
b. abuse of an incapacitated adult; 19
c. Health Information Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulation
compliance;
d. certain rights you may have waived when contracting for third party financial
coverage;
e. orders of the court; and
f. significant threats to self, others or property.
(4) To a safe setting and to know that the services provided are effective and of a
quality consistent with the standard of care within each profession and to know
that sexual relations between a mental health provider and a client or former client are a violation of the law (RSA 330-A:36).
(5) To obtain information, as allowed by law, pertaining to the mental health
provider’s assessment, assessment procedures and mental health diagnoses (RSA
330-A:2 VI).
(6) To participate meaningfully in the planning, implementation and termination
or referral of your treatment.
(7) To documented informed consent: to be informed of the risks and benefits of
the proposed treatment, the risks and benefits of alternative treatments and the
risks and benefits of no treatment. When obtaining informed consent for treatment for which safety and effectiveness have not been established, therapists will
inform their clients of this and of the voluntary nature of their participation. In
addition, clients have the right to be informed of their rights and responsibilities,
45

and of the mental health provider’s practice policies regarding confidentiality, office hours, fees, missed appointments, billing policies, electronic communications,
managed care issues, record management, and other relevant matters except as
otherwise provided by law.
(8) To obtain information regarding the provision(s) for emergency coverage.
(9) To receive a copy of your mental health record within 30 days upon written
request (except as otherwise provided by law), by paying a nominal fee designed
to defray the administrative costs of reproducing the record.
(10) To know that your mental health provider is licensed by the State of New
Hampshire to provide mental health services.
a. You have the right to obtain information about mental health practice in
New Hampshire. You may contact the Board of Mental Health Practice for
a list names, addresses, phone numbers and websites of state and national
professional associations listed in Mhp 502.02 (a)(1)(a-e).
b. You have the right to discuss questions or concerns about the mental health
services you receive with your provider.
c. You have the right to file a complaint with the Board of Mental Health Practice.”
(b) A licensee shall post a copy of the above mental health bill of rights in a
prominent location in the office of the mental health practitioner and provide a
copy upon request.
(c) A licensee shall provide a copy of the mental health bill of rights to the client
and/or agency if the assessment, consultation or intervention is provided outside
the office
COMPLAINT PROCEDURE

Any student or parent wishing to file a suggestion or complaint regarding care or
treatment received at Clark House may write or talk to:
Dr. John Bassi, Medical Director
Clark House
St. Paul’s School 325 Pleasant Street
Concord, NH 03301
603-229-4850
OR
Division of Public Health Services
Bureau of Health Facilities Administration
129 Pleasant Street
Concord, NH 03301
1-800-852-3345, ext. 9499
or 603-271-9499
TDD access 1-899-735-2964
46

Leaving School Grounds
Students are expected to be present in their role as a community member at SPS.
While some absences and leaves for family events, weekends, or outside-of-school
activities are expected, excessive time away to the extent that it affects one’s ability
to contribute as a community member not in-line with community expectations.
It is the School’s goal to have systems in place that evaluate the risks involved
with various activities/programs that take students off campus while also providing opportunities that challenge, present learning and growth opportunities for
our students. Parents/guardians should never hesitate to reach out to their child’s
adviser or the Dean of Students Office if they ever have a question about travel
off campus. Any time a student leaves campus (excluding routine school activities, i.e. athletic competitions), the student is expected to sign out through the
REACH system (as described below) and sign back in immediately upon return.
Only custodial parents may grant permission for a student leave request.
Travel for school related programs: The School will provide transportation for
students to participate in school related activities such as academic field trips,
school athletic team travel, Off Campus Program Trips and some club activities.
The specific mode of transportation for these types of activities will include but is
not limited to school owned vehicles, chartered coach buses, faculty/staff personally owned vehicles and on occasion, cabs or taxis. In general, we will not ask for
specific parental permission for students to participate in an activity off campus if
they will be accompanied by an SPS employee and the activity is a requirement of
a class or an athletic commitment. We do, however, ask each student to sign-out
with REACH (see below) when they leave campus for any reason.
REACH

REACH is an online and app based Student Management System to centrally
manage: leave requests, student sign in and sign out of the SPS campus, and evening check in. For leave requests that require parent permission, the system will
generate an e-mail to request parent approval. After parent and adviser approval
has been received, the request will be sent to the Dean of Students Office for final
approval. If a custodial parent does not have access to e-mail, please contact the
Dean of Students Office so that we can work with your child’s adviser to create
an alternate approval process. If a non-custodial parent receives an e-mail from
the REACH system, please contact the Dean of Students Office.
BEHAVIORAL EXPECTATIONS WHILE AWAY

Even while a student is away from school (including vacations), violations of
school expectations or rules will lead to disciplinary action.
DAY TRAVEL

During Town Hours (see below), students may travel within Concord without
prior permission if they are not missing any commitments, but must sign in and
out via REACH by changing their location before leaving the grounds and upon
47

their return. Students may not travel to Concord during class hours or other
scheduled commitments and may not leave Concord city limits without special
permission from the Dean of Students Office. Students are responsible for returning
to School on time. Please see the Expectations section for responses to Violation
of Town Hours or Failure to Sign In and Sign Out. The Safety Department is not
be available for transportation.
A student who needs to miss a Seated Meal for a special occasion must have permission from the Dean of Students Office before the end of the prior academic
day. Students will be given permission only to be with members of their immediate families.
While the School sets these guidelines for when and how a student may travel
within the Concord city limits, and violations of these guidelines may result in
disciplinary action, an SPS adult will not pre-approve each trip and cannot monitor in real-time if a student takes advantage of this opportunity. This mean the
ultimate decision and responsibility of whether a student travels downtown during
Town Hours rests with the custodial parent/guardian.
TOWN HOURS

Monday–Friday
Third and Fourth Form students: After class hours until 6:30 p.m.
Fifth and Sixth Form students: After class hours until 7:30 p.m.
Saturday
Third, Fourth, and Fifth Form students: From 12:10 p.m. until 10:30 p.m.
Sixth Form students: From 12:10 p.m. until 11:30 p.m.
Sunday
All students: From 10 a.m. until 6 p.m.
DAY LEAVE REQUESTS (AS LISTED IN REACH)

Extended Town Hours: Students may request permission from their adviser to stay
in Concord after Town Hours on a special occasion (dinner with parents, etc.)
provided they will not miss any commitments and return before their check in time.
Day Trip Beyond Concord: Students must seek permission in advance from the
Dean of Students Office before submitting a leave request in REACH for a day trip
beyond Concord and may not leave the grounds until their request is approved
in the system (by parents, adviser, and DOS Office). Examples include a trip to
Boston on a holiday or mid-term weekend, or travel with another student’s family
for the day, etc.
Non-School Activity: A parent must e-mail the DOS Office in advance to request
permission for their child to participate in a non-school activity that requires
leaving campus either for an individual event or recurring events. After receiving
approval, the student still needs to complete a leave request in REACH and wait
48

for final sign off from a parent, their adviser, and the DOS office before leaving
campus. Examples of this leave type would be participation in a non-SPS club
sports team (i.e. AAU basketball, a club travel soccer team, weekly participation
in Boston Youth Symphony, etc.). Students are limited to leaving campus one evening per week and on Sundays to participate in this type of activity. For recurring
events, parents should reach out to the dean of students to request permission for
all of the events for an upcoming term, so they can be considered in aggregate.
After approval, students still need to submit leave requests and sign in and out
for each individual leave.
Clubs and Activity: For non-routine, but school related day travel, students must
get parental permission through REACH before departing campus. Examples of
this leave type include a club adviser taking students to Boston to see a speaker
or performance, participation in a day long debate at another school, etc.
Special Event Leave: For students in good standing, they may take one special
event leave per term in which they may travel with a parent of a current student
to a game, concert, etc. as long as they do not miss any school commitments.
Parents of students must request permission via e-mail to the dean of students a
week before the event. Students who are On Bounds, On Restrictions, or serving
an early check-in of any sort may not leave for a special event. Before students
depart for the evening, the adult taking responsibility must speak with a member of
the Dean of Students Office and all sixth formers participating must have received
the appropriate permissions in REACH.
OVERNIGHT TRAVEL

Students leaving the school overnight must complete a leave request in REACH
and receive the appropriate approvals before their departure. Students need to
submit weekend leave requests in REACH by 4 p.m. on Thursday for the upcoming weekend. Parents and advisers need to approve the request by noon on Friday
so that the Dean of Students Office can review the requests for final approval.
Parents need to e-mail the dean of students (amarsh@sps.edu) to ask permission
for any weekends
WEEKEND LEAVE TYPES (AS LISTED IN REACH)

Short Weekend: begins after the last commitment on Saturday including regularly
scheduled games and practices.
Long Weekend: begins Friday after the last commitment including regularly
scheduled games and practices.
College Visits: Sixth Formers are allowed no more than two class days through the
Fall and Winter Terms combined, and up to three class days during the Spring Term
for college visits. All visits must be approved by the student’s college adviser and
the dean of students in advance of submitting the final leave request in REACH.

49

Non-School Activity Leave: A leave that requires missing school commitments
to participate in a non-school activity. Examples include non-SPS athletic
competitions, tournaments, or showcases. Prior permission via an e-mail request
to the dean of students at least a week in advance is required. If multiple leaves
are expected over the course of a term, then please reach out to the Dean of
Students in advance of the term to consider all of the requests in aggregate. Given
our expectations of community presence, no more than six school days (any day
with programming including Saturday mornings, LINC days, etc.,) in whole or in
part may be missed for this type of activity in a given term, and students should
not be missing six days in multiple terms of a given year.
Special Leaves: (weekend or otherwise) extend beyond these parameters and
require advance notice and permission from the Dean of Students Office. Students
must have a written request from a parent or guardian e-mailed to the dean of
students a week in advance. Special weekend requests may be denied depending
on the academic or disciplinary status of the student, the previous attendance record of the student, the number of class days that will be missed, or as otherwise
determined by the dean of students.
VACATION TRAVEL

Students and their parents are responsible for making travel arrangements to and
from the School during vacation periods (see vacation/bus schedule for dates and
times). Students will need to submit leave requests for vacation travel through
REACH and sign out from campus when they leave and sign back in upon their
return.
CLOSED WEEKENDS

No weekend may be taken on Closed Weekends. See the Academic Calendar for
a list of dates for Closed Weekends for this academic year. Special arrangements
to be away from School must be cleared through the Dean of Students Office.
WEEKEND PRIVILEGES

Form III: One long weekend in either Winter or Spring Term. Short and long
weekends end at 8 p.m. on Sunday
Form IV: One long weekend per year. Short and long weekends end at 9:30 p.m.
on Sunday
Form V: Two long weekends per year. Short and long weekends end at 9:30 p.m.
on Sunday
Form VI: One long weekend per term. Short and long weekends end at 9:30 p.m.
on Sunday

50

TRANSPORTATION OPTIONS

Taxis: To avoid excessive traffic on the grounds, the taxi companies use three
pick-up/drop-off locations:
• Front of Foster House
• Gym parking lot
• Entrance to circular drive behind Coit
There will be no student pick-ups after 6:30 p.m. except on Saturdays. The number
of passengers must not exceed seatbelt capacity.
Other Transportation: Students are expected to direct private transportation and
rideshare services to those same three drop off and pick up locations.
St. Paul’s School Shuttle Vans: Shuttle vans are available every hour on the hour,
most Saturdays from 2 to 10 p.m. and most Sundays from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. Vans
travel from the Athletic and Fitness Center to Concord, stopping on Main Street,
at Fort Eddy Plaza, the Steeplegate Mall, and Target before returning to the School
(exact route subject to change). SPS ID is required, and seats are available on a
first-come, first-served basis.
Hitchhiking: Hitchhiking is not permitted.
Outside Concord: Students may not leave Concord without permission from
the Dean of Students Office and their parents. Permission must be obtained by
completing a Day Travel Outside of Concord leave request in REACH. Proper
sign-out and sign-in procedures in REACH must still be followed upon departure
and return to campus.
GUESTS

Day Guests – Guests are not allowed during the school week. A Saturday guest
should not arrive before noon or stay later than 9 p.m.. Students may not bring
guests to evening School activities (dances, etc.). Sunday guests should not arrive
before 9 a.m. or stay later than 6 p.m.
Overnight Guests – Overnight guests are not allowed in the houses. Students who
are returning from SYA or term exchanges may seek permission from the Dean of
Students Office to stay overnight on Anniversary & Graduation Weekend.
ATTENDANCE

Students are expected to be present and on time for all classes, daily Chapel,
Seated Meal, assembly programs, athletic practices and games, appointments at
Clark House and other health facilities, and all other scheduled appointments and
commitments. A few things to keep in mind with regard to attendance:
• Four “tardies” equal one unexcused absence. If a student is more than 10
minutes late to chapel or 15 minutes late to a class, it will be considered an
absence.
51

• Each unexcused absence requires the student to serve Early Check In (restricted to room study without visitors from 8:30 p.m. to 10 p.m.) for one
evening.
• Accumulation of unexcused absences will lead to further consequences (see
Standard Responses to Unexcused Absences).
• Notification of Early Check In or further responses will be sent out on Fridays,
and students are expected to begin serving the following Sunday.
Students will be excused from their commitments if they are: a) ill in Clark House;
b) have received permission to be away from the School (see Leaving the School
Grounds); c) have followed appropriate procedures for taking a Prefect Mental
Health Day (see Student Leadership).
To excuse any absence after the fact, a student must complete an Absence Dispute
Form in the Dean of Students Office no later than 3 p.m. on the first Thursday
following the absence, or lose the chance to do so. Students are responsible for
checking daily attendance reports. Faculty members cannot clear absences but
may be called upon by a dean for input.
Students must be in good standing to take a weekend away. Students will not be
allowed to leave the School early or return late from School-scheduled vacations.
Commitments missed due to early departures and late returns will be considered
unexcused absences. If a situation arises that requires special consideration for
early departure or late return, the Dean of Students Office should be contacted.
Exceptions create difficulty for the entire community.
How do I clear an absence?
If you believe you have a valid excuse for missing a commitment or that there has
been a mistake, you should complete an Absence Dispute Form in the Dean of
Students Office as soon as possible. To be eligible to be cleared, an absence must
be disputed no later than 3 p.m. on the first Thursday following your absence. Do
not forward your absence e-mail in an attempt to clear your absence or ask a faculty
member to e-mail for you – you must dispute the absence yourself and in person.
What if I cannot clear the absence?
An unexcused absence will require you to serve Early Check In (restricted to room
study without visitors from 8:30 p.m. to 10 p.m.) for one evening. Accumulation
of unexcused absences will lead to further consequences (see Standard Responses
to Unexcused Absences).

Safety on the Grounds
FIRE SAFETY GUIDELINES

Fire inspectors from the Concord Fire Prevention Bureau may inspect School
buildings. To provide a safe environment for all, compliance with all regulations is
required and will be ensured by room and building inspections by heads of house,
52

and the School’s fire marshal. Heads of house are responsible for the corrections
of any fire safety violations found in their student houses.
GENERAL REGULATIONS

• Students may not change room occupancy by combining rooms, except in
the case of adjoining singles with an interior door connecting the rooms.
• No smoking, no candles, and no open-flame devices are permitted in student
rooms. Incense may not be burned. Natural cut Christmas trees and vegetation are prohibited.
• Know the location of fire exits, extinguishers, and pull stations in all School
buildings.
• Fire doors should never be propped open, and hallways and exits must never
be obstructed by any article which could hinder quick and easy exit from
a room, passageway, or building. Combustible materials (paper, rags, trash,
etc.) must not be piled or stored in any room or passageway.
• Tampering with fire and smoke alarms, other life safety devices to include
Automated External Defibrillators or using fire extinguishers except for firefighting purposes is a criminal offense and will result in disciplinary action.
• Rooms, hallways, and common areas are to be kept uncluttered and clean.
There must be a clear pathway and line of sight to the furthest part of any
student room from the entry door.
• Doors to student rooms must never be propped open and must self-close and
latch.
• Bicycles must be kept in bike racks or storage rooms. Bicycles are not to be
left or stored in student rooms, hallways, common rooms, or stairways.
• Nothing should be hung from, or over, fire sprinkler pipes, sprinkler heads,
strobes, or any other fire safety device.
ELECTRICAL/FIXTURE RESTRICTIONS

• No halogen lamps or string lights are allowed in student rooms. Floor lamps
with multiple gooseneck arms utilizing plastic shades are prohibited.
• Light bulb wattages used in lamps etc. should not exceed those recommended
by the manufacturer. The use of compact fluorescent or LED bulbs in place
of incandescent bulbs is strongly encouraged to save energy and to reduce
the potential of fire.
• UL-approved power strips with circuit breakers must be used with multiple
electrical devices and plugged directly into a wall outlet. One power strip per
outlet is allowed. Multiple plug adapters are prohibited.
• Extension cords without integrated circuit breaker protection are prohibited.
• No electrical wiring should be spliced. Wiring must not be run under rugs
or wall decorations or across passageways. Wires should be run around
baseboards but not near heating elements; they must be taped, never tacked
or stapled. They must not be looped around metal fixtures, pipes, or beds.
53

• Immersion heaters, hot plates, coffee pots (including Keurig-type coffee
machines), microwaves, refrigerators, TV sets, electric blankets, sun lamps,
space heaters, and other appliances are forbidden in student rooms. Prefects
are authorized to possess refrigerators.
• Hanging electric paper lanterns is prohibited.
FURNITURE/DECORATING RESTRICTIONS

• No fabric or synthetic materials included in flags, kites, uniform shirts, hats
and banners of any kind may be attached to walls or ceilings unless encased
in a glass frame or case. Curtains and draperies are prohibited.
• Flammable material, such as posters, banners, or decorations must not be
hung on the outside surface of any student room door or in house corridors.
• Posters should be secured flat to walls. The number of posters are not to be
excessive and may not exceed 20 percent of available square footage of the
room’s walls. Posters shall not overlap or be continuous but shall maintain
adequate spacing between other posters.
• All student furniture must be structurally sound and in good repair without
torn, taped, or worn fabric. Only one piece of upholstered furniture per student
is allowed and must be sized with consideration given to the dimensions of
the room. Only upholstered furniture that has been certified and labeled to
have passed either the California Technical Bulletin 117 (2013 edition) or
National Fire Protection Association Standard 260 (2009 edition) are to be
used in School dormitories. Furniture that does not meet this criteria will
not be allowed to remain in students rooms. Some rooms may accommodate
one small sofa. Furniture in no way can limit egress or reduce available floor
space so as to hamper firefighter or emergency medical personnel access to
a room.
• Floor coverings (rugs and mats) must be in good condition and must not
obstruct the opening or closing of doors.
• Under no circumstances may mattresses be placed on floors. Students may
only use School provided beds. Only mattresses that have been certified and
labeled to have passed both the California Technical Bulletin 129
• (2002), Flammability Test Procedure for Mattresses for use in Public Buildings and Boston Fire Department IX-11 (1983), Regulations for Mattresses
and Box Springs used in Hotels and University Dormitories, are to be used
in School dormitories. School-issued mattresses have passed both tests. Lofts
are only permitted when assembled by SPS Facilities personnel.
• Bookcases and dressers must be placed against a wall away from room exit.
There must be a clear line of sight to the furthest part of any student room
from the entry door. The use of any object(s) as an improvised partition is
prohibited in a student room.
• Metal or fire-rated plastic wastebaskets must be used.
54

OUTDOOR FIRE RESTRICTIONS

No person shall kindle a fire anywhere on the School grounds without the written
permission of campus safety and a permit issued by the Concord Fire Department.
This requirement shall include, but is not limited to campfires, bonfires, outdoor
fireplaces and chimneys.
FIRE EVACUATION DRILLS

Fire evacuation drills are regularly scheduled for student houses and academic
buildings. When the fire alarm sounds, leave the building quickly through the
nearest exit and assemble at the designated area. Heads of house will do a student
house familiarization walk-through during the first week of school. This includes
advising students on where to meet outside the house for attendance purposes
and shelter locations in the event of inclement weather.
One announced house evacuation drill will be conducted during the first 30 days
that school is in session. Future house and campus building drills will be unannounced and conducted with such frequency so as to ensure students’ familiarity
with their responsibilities. Times of the drills will vary.
Accidental alarms may be used as a substitute for scheduled evacuation drills if,
in the opinion of responding Safety personnel and the Head of House, the evacuation was timely and a sufficient number of students were present to demonstrate
familiarity with their responsibilities.
Upon any evidence of fire, activate the alarm pull station located by the exit, leave
the building and go to the designated assembly area. Evacuation is mandatory
by all building occupants upon the sounding of an alarm. School fire alarms are
connected to the fire department that will respond to the alarm.
Under no circumstances, should the building be re-entered without authorization
from fire or Safety personnel. The silencing of the building fire alarms by the fire
department does not signal re-entry. Wait for specific permission from the Safety
Department or the fire department.
If during an evacuation the presence of smoke or fire prevents you from exiting,
consider another emergency exit or retreat back into your room. Close the door
behind you, seal the bottom of the door with a towel, slightly open a window and
hang a sheet or towel out the window to alert fire department personnel. Call 911
immediately and explain where you are and your situation.
In case of any critical campus emergency ALWAYS DIAL 911.
OUTSIDE SIREN AND OTHER EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS

In addition to the traditional building fire alarm systems, St. Paul’s School has
installed and maintains a separate Emergency Alert & Notification (EAN) system
to be used to alert the School community of dangerous conditions on the grounds.
Unlike a fire alarm, when the EAN system is activated, all community members
must seek shelter in the nearest school building and remain there until given
55

additional official instructions. Conditions under which the EAN system may be
used include but are not limited to, armed intruders, hazardous material spill or
release, severe weather, flooding, etc.
The EAN system is composed of outdoor warning sirens and wireless indoor
speakers located in various buildings across the grounds.
When the EAN is activated, the first thing you are likely to hear is the outdoor
warning siren. Once the outdoor warning siren has sounded and additional information becomes available, it will be distributed via text messages, e-mail, in
building speakers located in many school buildings, and computer pop up messages on school networked computers. The School switchboard may also have
information related to the emergency.
The outdoor siren will stop sounding after about three minutes from initial activation but this does not mean that the emergency has passed.
GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES DURING EAN ACTIVATION

When the outdoor sirens sound, all community members should immediately stop
what they are doing and enter the nearest building. Once inside, adults should
attempt to do the following:
• Gather unsupervised students into a room, closet, or space; and take charge
of the group.
• Secure openings into the room by locking or barricading them.
• Turn off lights, quiet occupants, and silence cell phones.
• During an actual emergency, dial 911 to contact authorities when able.
• Never release occupants from a secured area until there is positive confirmation the issue is concluded.
In an actual emergency, you may be in your place of shelter for an extended period
of time depending on the nature of the emergency. You must remain in your place
of shelter until you are given specific instructions from either the School EAN
system’s pre-recorded message or in person from a School official, Safety officer, or
uniformed officer that it is safe to leave. Do not leave the building under any other
conditions, even the sounding of the building fire alarm, unless you can actually
see or smell smoke/fire. During a drill and only during a drill, the all-clear will be
sent over the outdoor and indoor speakers and via electronic communication. No
demonstration or drill of the EAN system will take place without advanced notice.
OUTDOOR WATER ACTIVITIES

The streams and ponds at St. Paul’s are among its most beautiful natural assets,
and we encourage students to enjoy these resources safely. To engage in any water
activity, a student will need a Swimming Permission Form signed by a parent and
filed with the Athletic Department, and will need to pass the School’s swim test.
Water activities should occur only during daylight hours and with at least one
other person – it is unsafe to swim or boat alone.
56

Boating is allowed on Lower School Pond and Turkey Pond, as long as it does
not interfere with crew. Life jackets or personal flotation devices (PFDs) must be
present for each person in the boat (including rafts). Each PFD must be in good
condition, the proper size for the intended wearer, and readily accessible. You
may bring your own inflatable raft or small non-motorized watercraft less than 8
feet in length, but you must get approval and register it with the Dean of Students
Office. Boats may be stored in the boathouse.
The streams and ponds at SPS are among its most beautiful natural assets, and
students are encouraged to enjoy these resources in a respectful and safe manner.
Swimming is allowed at the Lower School docks, the shore area adjacent to the
Gordon Rink, and the Turkey Pond docks. Many School traditions have evolved
around these bodies of water. While honoring these long-standing traditions, the
most important consideration for the School is the safety and well-being of our
students. The decision of whether a student may swim while at SPS rests solely
with the custodial parent/guardian and the student. This decision should be made
after thoughtful consideration of the following regarding outdoor swimming and
boating activities at SPS:
1. The School strongly recommends that all students pass their swim test
administered at the MA Indoor Pool prior to engaging in outdoor water
activities. Due to nature of outdoor swimming, however, it is not possible
for the School to ensure that students have passed their swim test prior to
swimming outdoors.
2. Outdoor water activities are permitted at only three designated spots on
campus: the boat docks on Turkey Pond, the Lower School docks, and the
shore area adjacent to the Gordon Rink. The water is a minimum of six feet
deep off both docks and no lifeguards are present.
3. Boating with personally owned vessels, including but not limited to a canoe,
kayak or inflatable raft, is allowed on the Lower School Pond and Turkey Pond
as long as it does not interfere with crew. Life jackets or Personal Floatation
Devices (PFDs) must be present for each person in a personally owned vessel. Each PFD must be in good condition, be the proper size for the intended
wearer, and most importantly, be readily available. Students may bring their
own vessel, but it must be registered with the dean of students office. Vessels
may be stored in the boathouse but the School takes no responsibility for loss
or damage to student property.
4. Swimming takes place in the designated spots described above without any
adult supervision.
5. There are no lifeguards on duty which means students swim at their own risk.
6. No swimming take place unless the dean of students office has communicated
outdoor swimming is “open”.
7. No swimming alone.
8. No swimming after dark.
57

9. No jumping off bridges or other structures.
10. No “ponding” or otherwise forcing a person into the water.
11. No swimming if thunder is audible or lightning has been observed.
The School maintains two dams within the waterways. Swimming in the immediate vicinity of either dam is very dangerous and strictly prohibited. Any violation
will be reported to the dean of students office. Refer to the Athletics Section for
information regarding indoor swimming.
It is critical that students and parents be aware when considering whether to
swim outdoors or engage in boating activities as described below that there are no
lifeguards on duty at the designated outdoor swim areas and no adult supervision.
While the School sets the following rules regarding outdoor swimming/boating
activities and violations of these rules will result in disciplinary action, an SPS adult
will not pre-approve a student’s decision to swim outdoors and cannot monitor in
real-time if a student takes advantage of this opportunity. This mean the ultimate
responsibility of whether a student decides to swim in the designated outdoor
swim areas rests with the custodial parent(s)/guardian. The custodial parent(s)/
guardian must communicate their wishes the student and take full responsibility
that they honor this decision.
Parents should understand and are asked to acknowledge, in the dean of students
swimming consent form, at the start of the school year that they accept full responsibility if their student decides to participate in the outdoor swim activities
described below.
DRONES AND HOVERBOARDS

The use and/or storage of hoverboards, whether inside or outside school buildings,
is prohibited at St. Paul’s School. Additionally, the recreational use of drones, or
Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) is prohibited on school grounds. The educational
use of drones during a class, and supervised by a faculty member, is permitted while
following current safety guidelines outlined by the Federal Aviation Association.
BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ETC.

The School requires all students to wear helmets regardless of age while riding a
bicycle, unicycle, skateboard, scooter, or inline skates, etc. We require safe and
reasonable use, particularly in areas near public streets. Students are required
to stay on defined campus paths and roadways (and off the grass). No scooters,
skateboards, or in-line skates may be used inside School buildings, on any steps,
ramps, benches, or railings. Students are expected to lock bicycles when not in
use, and to obey all rules of the road, including the use of proper lighting and
reflectors at night.
Students are encouraged to register their bicycles with the Safety Department
in case they are lost or stolen. Students can do so by signing in to the Millville
Community Portal, selecting Apps, then Bicycle Registration, and filling out the
58

required fields. Once the form has been completed, you will receive a registration
sticker to affix to your bicycle via school mail.
WEAPONS POLICY

“Firearms” are defined as any gun, shotgun, rifle, pistol, or handgun designed to
fire bullets, BBs, pellets, paintballs, shot, or any projectile, regardless of the propellant used. “Other weapons” are defined as any instrument that can be utilized to
inflict or threaten bodily injury. These include, but are not limited to, knives with
fixed blades, pocket knives with blades longer than 4”, swords, metal knuckles,
blackjacks, bows and arrows, crossbows, blowguns, martial arts weapons or any
explosive or incendiary device.
Prohibited Activities
The following activities are strictly prohibited on all property owned or operated
by St. Paul’s School and at all School-sanctioned events and trips:
• the unauthorized use, possession, or storage of firearms, weapons, fireworks,
and explosives; this includes the storage of such items in vehicles parked on
property owned or operated by the School
• the unauthorized possession or use of realistic replicas of weapons
• the unauthorized possession or use of hazardous chemicals that could pose
a health risk; this includes chemicals that, when combined with other substances, could be hazardous or present a danger to others.
Exceptions
This policy does not apply to the following:
• law enforcement officials duly authorized to carry such weapons
• on-campus theatrical productions requiring props, provided these props are
properly secured when not in use and are used under the guidance of a School
faculty or staff member
• military drills, honor guards, and color guards utilizing facsimile weapons
• historical displays
• a starter pistol used for athletic events, properly stored when not in use and
used by a game official or school faculty or staff member
• individuals licensed to possess, discharge, or display fireworks when providing these services for approved School events
• individuals licensed to possess, discharge, or use explosives when providing
these services for approved School construction projects
• the separate storage of personal firearms and ammunition by adult community members residing in school housing, pursuant to the Firearms Storage
Authorization policy
• normal kitchen utensils and cleaning supplies when appropriately used.

59

VEHICLES

Students may not keep or drive an automobile in Concord or its vicinity during
school session. Students living locally may not drive on the School grounds or
transport any St. Paul’s students. Students may ride with their parents, authorized
SPS drivers as determined by the School, or any licensed driver approved by their
parents.
Vehicles and Safety
Students are not permitted to have or to operate any motorized vehicles, including cars, motorcycles, mopeds, or motorized scooters while they are at school. A
student may use public transportation or a car / rideshare / taxi service, but must
always sign out in advance of leaving SPS and only use the three approved drop
off and pick up locations (see Taxi section).
Pedestrian Safety
Although students can walk to all campus locations, the school property is bisected
by Dunbarton Road. Students should take special care in crossing Dunbarton
Road and all streets on the grounds and should always use marked pedestrian
lights and crosswalks. When walking at night, students are advised to use only
pathways with lighting and to avoid walking alone in dark areas. Any student who
is alone and feels unsafe walking on campus at night should request a ride from
the School’s Safety Department.
AHERA NOTIFICATION

St. Paul’s has been inspected for the presence of asbestos-containing material
(ACBM) in accordance with the Environmental Protection Agency’s Regulation
40 CFR Part 763. ACBM is present in several of the School buildings and is being
managed safely in accordance with State and Federal standards. These materials
are monitored every six months until they have been removed from the buildings.
Inspection Reports for each building and the Management Plan are available for
review during normal business hours at the Facilities Operations office located
at 58 Dunbarton Road. This information is also available electronically via the
St. Paul’s School intranet – SPS Policies & Procedures. If you have any questions
or need assistance, please contact the School’s Asbestos Program Manager at the
Facilities Operations office, telephone number 603-229-4602 or by dialing extension 4602 from any School phone.
ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP

St. Paul’s School is committed to environmental responsibility. You can find more
information about the ecology and sustainability of the School at eco.sps.edu.
Environmental Values Statement (Adopted December 2008)
Inspired by its natural surroundings, St. Paul’s School teaches and practices the

60

sacred duty of environmental responsibility. To promote ecological literacy and
exemplify environmental stewardship, the School commits to:
• Continuously reduce greenhouse gas emissions via energy efficiency measures,
purchase of electricity from low-carbon sources, and on-site renewable energy
production.
• Decrease production of waste and hazardous materials, both in our own
operations and those of our suppliers.
• Promote health, productivity, and safety in all building maintenance, renovation, and construction.
• Enhance the functionality and biodiversity of campus ecosystems through
sound ecological management practices, the use of native species in landscaping, and low-impact grounds maintenance.
• Incorporate comparative environmental analysis into the decision-making
process for campus planning, investments, and purchasing.
• Foster ecological literacy in the community through classroom instruction,
professional development, service learning, and special events.
• Establish environmental responsibility indicators by which to monitor and
report progress.
Through these measures we aim to make environmental stewardship a cultural
norm at St. Paul’s School and a practice that remains with community members
well beyond their time at this place of extraordinary natural beauty.
Recycling and Waste
Visit eco.sps.edu for a complete list of what you can recycle and where.
Look for recycling (blue) and trash (black) color coded bins around campus,
including in classrooms and your house. Proper disposal of waste and recycling
is part of your membership in the School community.
Trash: Look for black bins with black bags.
Recycling: Paper, glass, plastic and metal goes in blue bins with clear bags:
• There is no need to sort, our recycling is ‘single stream’.
• Flatten large pieces of cardboard. There is no need to bag them.
• Recycling should be free of food. Greasy plates or cheesy foil go in the trash.
• Common items that CANNOT be recycled are napkins and Styrofoam.
• Plastic grocery bags and plastic films DO NOT go in these recycling bins.
Other Recycling: Many other items may be recycled, just not in the blue bins.
Visit eco.sps.edu for the drop-off locations for:
• All batteries*
• Hangers (from your laundry and dry cleaning)
• Compact fluorescent light bulbs (CFLs)*
61

• Electronics, small and large*
• Plastic bags and plastic films (even if it has a recycling symbol)
*These items are, or can be, dangerous to our health and the environment if not properly
disposed of. Do not place them in the trash.
House Drop-Off Bins: You’ll be responsible for helping keep your house clean
by taking trash and recycling to your house’s drop-off site. These stainless steel
‘rodent proof’ containers can be found outside your house. Only bagged trash
and recycling can be placed in these bins. Be sure bags are tied tight. Your head
of house will have more details.
Appropriate Use of Natural Resources
Over seventy percent of School property consists of forests, meadows, ponds, and
brooks. Additionally there are gardens, orchards, cattle, chickens and honeybees
that community members and farmers maintain on campus. These spaces are
open to all and you are encouraged to discover and explore them. As you do,
remember that the land, structures, plants and animals are a part of the School
community as well.
• You should be respectful and safe in your exploration of the School’s natural
resources and towards all of the School’s ecology, plant, animal or otherwise.
• Wherever you find yourself on the property, your behavior should be consistent with the policies outlined throughout this handbook.
• Always notify someone where you are going and when you plan to return or
bring a buddy.
• You should endeavor to “Leave no trace.” Help maintain the wild-spaces on
campus by sticking to established trails.
• Notify Facilities or the Environmental Steward about any hazards or concerns
you encounter on the trails (downed trees, washed out areas, etc.).
See Outdoor Water Activities section of this handbook for further expectations.

Student Leadership
St. Paul’s Student Leaders are co-creators of healthy cultures rooted in our school’s
values: love, kindness, compassion, humility, unselfishness, inclusivity and the
pursuit of wisdom. Student Leaders demonstrate the social emotional competencies and skills to create and sustain community norms that uphold our school’s
values. Student Leaders will
• create a welcome, inclusive environment
• respect and support all community members
• actively up-stand to challenge behaviors and attitude that are not in alignment
with community expectations

62

• engage in an ongoing process of self-reflection to strengthen and develop
leadership skills
• mentor peers in their growth and development
Potential leaders will be assessed for demonstrated social emotional skill development, their ability to see challenges and setbacks as opportunities for growth, and
their investment in living in alignment with the school’s values.
HOUSE PREFECTS

Each winter, prefects are chosen to serve for the following academic year. They
must be Fifth Form students and must first complete a thorough application process. Training takes the form of large group exercises as well as those conducted
in smaller groups. Topics covered include student health and safety, hazing, harassment & bullying, group dynamics, clinical issues, sex and sexuality, conflict
resolution, listening skills, and crisis intervention. At any time during the year,
a head of house, in consultation with the Dean of Students Office, may require a
prefect to relinquish his or her position as prefect.
PREFECT MENTAL HEALTH DAYS

Given that prefects spend time assisting their peers in the house and are often
called upon to put the needs of others ahead of their own, a prefect may, with the
permission of his or her head of house, take an occasional mental health day to
make up for lost time and sleep. A prefect must alert his or her head of house of
a desire to take a mental health day on the morning of the requested day. Thehead
of house will notify the Dean of Students Office, which will then notify teachers
that the prefect is excused from classes for the day. The prefect may not attend
classes, athletic practices, or evening activities but may attend meals (including
Seated Meal) and seek academic assistance in the evening hours. The prefect must
check in at 8:30 p.m.
LINC LEADERS

LINC leaders are Vth and VIth formers who help co-lead LINC classes, plan and
run LINC days, and generally help with the implementation of the LINC curriculum at the school wide level.
STUDENT GOVERNMENT

Student Council
The Student Council provides a forum for students to present ideas to improve
the School community and serves as an advisory body to the Rector. The officers
of the Sixth Form preside over the Student Council and choose a faculty adviser
each year. The council meetings are open to the community.
Student Council Charter
The charter governs the operation of the Student Council. It includes information on the Confidence System, the Honor System, elections, and other important
matters. Copies are available in the library and in the Dean of Students Office.
63

Sixth Form Officers
The four Sixth Form officers are elected by their form in the spring of their Fifth
Form year. The officers share many responsibilities, including weekly meetings
with the Rector, running Student Council meetings, serving as student reps on
the Discipline Committee (DC), and presiding over other student matters. For
further information, see a Sixth Form officer.
Form Representatives
Two representatives each from the Third, Fourth, and Fifth Forms are elected to
serve on the Student Council. In addition to serving on the council, form representatives run form meetings and organize form activities.
House Representatives
Each house elects a representative to the Student Council. House representatives
attend Student Council meetings, report back to students during house meetings,
solicit input from them, and represent the members of their house before the
Discipline Committee.
Student Admissions Officers
Student Admissions Officers are sixth formers who work with the Admission Office
to organize tours for visitors to the School, help select the next incoming class,
and represent the face of St. Paul’s students to the outside world.

Daily Life
STUDENT DRESS CODE

Students are expected to dress respectfully, sensibly, and appropriately at all
times but are encouraged to express their individuality. Any ostentatious display
of lifestyle, clothing, possessions, or sexuality is inappropriate. During School
functions or special occasions, students should dress in a manner consistent
with the seriousness/formality of the setting. Seated Meal, in particular, is a time
for family-style dinner and does not represent an opportunity for extravagance.
Academic Day
(From 8:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday and 1 p.m.,
Wednesday and Saturday)
This includes lunches! Please note that the end of the Academic Day is either at
3:30 or 1 p.m., as described above and not when an individual student’s classes
are completed.
Meets Dress Code:
• Dresses, skirts, blouses, dress shirts, collared shirts, sweaters, turtlenecks and
sweatshirts
• Dress pants, trousers/slacks, khakis, corduroys, cargo pants, jeans (including
blue), and shorts
64

Does Not Meet Dress Code:
• Clothing that is not neat and in good repair
• Athletic wear including sweatpants and warm-ups
• Athletic/unisex T-shirts
• Leggings and/or yoga-type pants may be worn only under a skirt or tunic
• Army fatigues or bib overalls
• Hats may not be worn in any School building
• Spaghetti-strapped tank tops, tube tops, halter tops, or anything that is lowcut or reveals the midriff area; all tops must have collars and/or sleeves and
must also have a back
• Miniskirts and shorts of a length higher than mid-thigh
School Functions, Special Occasions
(Anniversary Weekend and Graduation events, Family Weekend events, Evensongs,
and Seated Meals)
Seated Meal is a time for students to share a family-style dinner with faculty members and, in some cases, with their families. It does not represent an opportunity
for extravagance. Any ostentatious display of lifestyle, clothing, possessions, or
sexuality is inappropriate.
Meets Dress Code:
• Dinner jacket and tie
• Dresses, blouses, tucked-in dress shirts, collared shirts, turtlenecks, and
sweaters
• Dress pants, trousers/slacks, skirts, dress shorts (in warm weather)
• Shoes (with or without socks), sandals without heels
• Shawls, cardigans, or other cover-ups worn over spaghetti-strapped and
strapless dresses
Does not Meet Dress Code:
• Clothing that is not neat and in good repair
• Athletic wear
• Athletic shoes, high-heeled shoes may not be worn
• Polo shirts, T-shirts, dress shirts without ties
• Spaghetti-strapped, strapless, or low-cut garments (unless they are worn with
above-specified cover-ups)
• Cropped tops, tube tops, athletic/unisex T-shirts
• Tightly fitted and/or revealing clothing
• Anything revealing the midriff area
• Cargo pants, blue denim, painter’s pants, army fatigues, bib overalls, or casual
corduroys
65

• Miniskirts or shorts (of a length higher than mid-thigh)
• Head coverings of any type (except for those dictated by religious observance)
may not be worn in School buildings under any circumstance
Non-Academic Day
(Before 8:30 a.m. and after 3:30 p.m., Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday; and
after 1 p.m., Wednesday and Saturday, except for Seated Meal)
When classes are not in session, students may dress in a more relaxed manner,
but should remember to dress respectfully, sensibly, and appropriately at all times.
Sweaty athletic wear, swimwear, pajamas, and boxer shorts are inappropriate,
especially in the dining hall.
ATHLETICS

Medical Form
Prior to athletic participation, a Parental Permit and Insurance Information form
must be received by the School. Student Illness A student who is absent from
classes due to illness should not practice or compete on that day unless specific
approval has been given by Clark House (health center).
Equipment
Basic equipment can be purchased at the School Bookstore, and there are several
athletic stores in Concord. However, most students bring their own equipment for
the sports they plan to play. Students will be assessed for unreturned equipment
and uniforms at the end of each term.
Travel Days
All travel information will be sent to coaches before the season begins. This plan
is tentative. The information includes time of departure, means of transportation,
meal arrangements, and other information. If departure times (prior to 1 p.m.) do
not allow sufficient time for athletes to have lunch at the dining hall, a deli line will
be set up at the Athletic & Fitness Center entryway to feed team members before
away games. In the case of a small number of students traveling, individual box
lunches will be provided and may be delivered to the Athletic & Fitness Center
entryway. In each case, only team members whose schedule prevents them from
going to the dining hall should partake in these meals. Travel teams will depart
from the Athletic & Fitness Center parking lot.
Team Pictures
Team pictures are taken each season. The athletes are allowed to charge an 8- by
10-inch photograph to their student account.

66

Letter Requirements
When considering awarding a player an SPS letter certificate (varsity or junior
varsity), coaches will take the following into consideration:
• Regardless of playing time, if a player makes the team, remains on the roster
in good standing, and commits to practices, travel, and support of the team,
then the student will be awarded a letter.
• In a sport where there is a ladder system, the coaches will work off 50 percent
playing time or use their individual discretion.
• In the case of injury to a student, where the injury may have directly prevented
the individual from fully committing to practices, travel, and support of the
team, the athlete may be considered for a letter if his or her conduct has been
consistent with team expectations throughout the season.
NOTE: The student members of the team are encouraged to recognize in their own
way, the significant contributions of any support personnel that had an effect on their
program. It should be pointed out that the second instance for awarding a letter may
cover the student manager.
Athletic Clubs
Until the late 1950s, all team athletics were intramural (except for ice hockey)
with students playing for one of three clubs, Delphian, Isthmian, or Old Hundred. There are also two intramural boat clubs, Halcyon and Shattuck. Each new
student is assigned to an athletic club and a boat club upon arrival at the School.
SPORTS OUTSIDE THE SCHOOL

At St. Paul’s School, the demands on a student’s time and energy are significant.
Students are expected to participate fully in the academic, athletic, and residential
life of the School and to fulfill all the school required commitments. As such,
there are limits on the amount of time that students are allowed to leave campus
to participate in non-SPS athletic teams and competitions. Please see the section
on Non-School Activity Leaves for more information.
Also, the School provides opportunities in a variety of sports at levels appropriate
to individual abilities. For these reasons, St. Paul’s School cautions that participation on an athletic team outside may be challenging and have a negative impact
on the SPS experience.
CONDUCT

Unsportsmanlike conduct or action of a player resulting in ejection from a game
by an official will invoke an automatic one-game suspension to be served in the
next contest. SPS is proud of the behavior and sportsmanship displayed by its players, coaches, and fans. We value spirited and fair play as well as positive support
for our players and teams. In order to ensure that our expected level of decorum
continues each season and each game, we ask that all members of the community
continually renew their efforts to abide by the ideals of good sportsmanship.
67

DISCIPLINARY ACTION

Students who are On Bounds will not be allowed to compete or travel with interscholastic athletic teams. Students who are On Bounds are expected to continue
to practice with the team. Training and team expectations are outlined by coaches
in consultation with the director of athletics, the dean of students, and the Rector.
FALL ATHLETICS

Male
Cross Country
Football
Soccer
		

Female
Coed
Cross Country
Fitness **
Field Hockey
Club Soccer
Soccer
Club Tennis
Volleyball 		

WINTER ATHLETICS

Male

Female

Coed

Alpine Skiing ^ $
Alpine Skiing ^ $
Fitness **
Basketball
Basketball
Instructional
		Skiing/Snowboarding $
Ice Hockey
Ice Hockey
Club Hockey		
		
Squash
Squash Wrestling
Nordic Skiing
Nordic Skiing
			

Club Nordic Skiing
Club Swimming

SPRING ATHLETICS

Male
Baseball
Crew
Club Crew
Lacrosse
Tennis
Track

Female
Softball ^
Crew
Club Crew
Lacrosse
Tennis
Track

Coed
Fitness **
Club Squash

** Only offered to Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Form students
^ Varsity only
$ Additional fee charged to student account
FACILITIES USE GUIDELINES

Gillespie Strength & Fitness Center Philosophy:
The Athletic & Fitness Center of St. Paul’s School is dedicated to the health and
wellness of our students. The only commitment more important than their health
and wellness is their safety and security. All of the guidelines for use – who may
use this facility, under what conditions, and when – must be understood within
this fundamental commitment to the safety, security, health, wellness, and fitness
of the students currently enrolled at our School. The student Fitness program,
68

with appropriate facility supervision, is given priority in The Gillespie Strength
& Fitness Center from 3:30 to 5 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Friday
during the academic year.
Orientation of Strength and Conditioning Programs:
All new incoming students need to go through a fitness center and weight room
orientation with the Athletic Facilities Coordinator before using the Gillespie
Strength & Fitness Center. The Athletic Facilities Coordinator also is available and
trained to help teams and individuals with strength and conditioning programs.
Guest Policy:
An occasional guest may accompany faculty and staff. Faculty and staff need to
be present whenever a guest is using the facility, and the guest will need to sign a
waiver before using the facility. Arrangements must be made in advance; waivers
are available in the Athletic Office. Any guest under the age of 18 (between ages
14–18) must have signed permission by his/her parent/guardian to use the Athletic & Fitness Center. Each community member is allowed two guests per visit.
More than two guests is considered a group, for which use of the facility must be
preapproved through Barbara Ferman, special events coordinator.
Supervision:
Any community member under the age of 14 will need parental supervision to
use the Gillespie Strength & Fitness Center, so parents must accompany their
children and be able to visually monitor them at all times. No children under 12
years of age are allowed in the Gillespie Strength & Fitness Center.
Ma Swimming Pool Swimming Permission:
Any student under the age of 18 must have a Swimming Permit signed by his/her
parent/guardian on file. Students without a Swimming Permit are not allowed in
the pool.
The following rules apply at all times regarding swimming at the Ma Pool:
• All students must pass a swim test administered at the Ma Indoor Pool.
• Swimming is only allowed during posted hours when lifeguards are on duty.
• Swimmers must follow the instructions of the lifeguards on duty and adhere
to all posted signs.
• Swimmers must immediately inform the nearest lifeguard of any pain, discomfort, fatigue, or any other symptoms of distress to themselves or another
swimmer.
• Due to the risks of shallow water syndrome, swimmers are prohibited from
holding their breath for prolonged periods of time underwater and should
immediately notify a lifeguard if they witness another swimmer performing
this risky behavior.

69

Swim Test:
Each person who enters the pool for the first time must pass a swimming test; this
includes all students, faculty, staff, family, and alumni. The swimming test involves
swimming a lap of the pool and treading water. Anyone who does not pass the
swimming test must remain in the shallow end of the pool. Sign-In Procedures:
All swimmers must take a shower before entering the pool. All swimmers must
also sign in before entering the water and sign out on the large dry-erase board
on the pool deck after leaving the water.
Guest Policy:
All guests must be accompanied by the SPS community member at all times, and
all guests must sign a swim permit waiver. Guests under the age of 18 will need
to have a signed permit from his/her parent/ guardian. All guests must also take
the Swim Test.
Climbing Wall
• For each person who uses the climbing wall there must be a signed permission on file (signed by a parent or guardian for any St. Paul’s School student)
and a registration card on file stating that he/she has passed his/her belay and
climbing safety test.
• All climbers must sign in with the supervising staff. • Climbing is only permitted during open wall hours with staff supervision.
• Absolutely no untested climbers or belayers are permitted to use the wall.
• articipants must use the School’s harness unless the wall supervisor has approved their harness. The Athletic Facility will provide all other climbing
equipment.
• Climbing shoes are required on the climbing wall and may be loaned from
the facility. Helmets, which are an additional safety option, are recommended
but not required.
• Only certified institution-approved staff may teach belaying and climbing
classes.
• All climbers must tie-in with a figure 8 with backup knot.
• Only active belayers, climbers and supervisor(s) should be in the climbing
area.
• Standing position is required during belaying. No sitting or lying down while
belaying.
• No one should walk between the belayer and wall.
• Dangling jewelry, excessively loose clothing, gum, candy, and items in pockets
must be removed when climbing or belaying. Long hair must be tied back.
Appropriate attire is required when using the climbing wall. 95
• Only chalk balls are permitted on the climbing wall. Loose chalk is not
allowed.
70

• No food or beverages are permitted in the climbing area.
• Bouldering/free climbing is not allowed on the climbing wall. Those wanting
to boulder may use the bouldering wall in the Matthes Cage.
• When climbing on the bouldering wall, climbers should not “top out” and
stand on the top of the wall. Only climbers’ hands should reach the top of
the bouldering wall.
• Tampering with the wall when closed will result in disciplinary action for
any student or employee of St. Paul’s School.
Matthes Cage Rules
• All activity must take place inside the netted area. If no one is using the track,
players can throw balls against the far (back) wall only.
• The indoor track is closed while the climbing wall is open.
• Live pitching/hitting is not allowed. Hitting grounders/soft toss is allowed.
• Helmets must be worn by anyone inside the netted area during boys lacrosse
(no exceptions).
• Please review and follow all bouldering wall rules. Report any problems with
the bouldering wall mats to the athletic facilities coordinator or Equipment
Room managers.
• If the building is not staffed, you must always exercise with a partner and sign
in on the clipboard in the Gillespie Strength & Fitness Center. Bouldering
Wall
• Bouldering is only permitted during Athletic & Fitness Center regular hours
of operation.
• Climbers must not climb alone – all climbers must have a partner present
when bouldering.
• Any community member under the age of 12 will need parental supervision
when using the bouldering wall. This means that parents must accompany
their children and be able to visually monitor their children at all times.
• Keep the crash pad area around the bouldering wall free of gear and personal
items.
• No topping out on the bouldering wall. All hands, feet, etc. must remain
below the top of the wall. • Intentional jumping off the wall is not allowed.
• Inform other climbers of any situation as seen unsafe. All climbers are asked
to assist and encourage other climbers.
• Report all accidents, loose holds, or damaged equipment to the SPS Athletic
Department.
• Loose chalk is not permitted on the wall; participants must have chalk balls
in a chalk bag.
• Food, beverages, and chewing gum are not permitted in the climbing area.
71

In the majority of cases, students are responsible for providing their own athletic
equipment. Students in need are given first priority on loaned equipment for club
sports. Please contact the director of athletics with any questions regarding athletic
programs at St. Paul’s School. Athletic schedules, directions to competing schools,
and contest results can be found on the St. Paul’s School website at www.sps.edu.

Activities, Events, and Meetings
WEEKEND ACTIVITIES

As a fully residential school, St. Paul’s is committed to offering weekly student
activities options that are engaging and fun. Throughout the year, Saturday night
activities are planned and hosted by many different student groups. All registered
student-led clubs and societies host at least one all-school event each year. Other
students groups, including forms, houses, or even an unofficial group with a great
idea, are encouraged to host events as well.
WEEKDAY EVENTS

In addition to student-run Saturday night programming, there are occasional
weekday events and at least one special event dance each term. Most students
also stop by the Rectory for the weekly Rectory Open House, where Mr. and Mrs.
Hirschfeld open up the library for students to play games, chat, and enjoy some
homemade snacks and refreshments.
SATURDAY NIGHT LIFE (SNL)

Students interested in hosting a weekend event should contact St. Paul’s Night
Life (SNL), the student group charged with soliciting, planning, and executing
weekend programming throughout the year.
Students interested in helping with student activities should consider applying for
SNL at the beginning of the school year. SNL members are selected from all four
forms to work alongside the Dean of Students Office to plan events, and they also
have the opportunity to guide other student groups through the process of hosting
events. From student-deejayed dances to hypnosis shows, sports competitions to
outdoor movie screenings, SNL ensures that there are plenty of fun and healthy
outlets for students each Saturday night.
CONCERTS

The Keiser Concert Series provides musical performances at the School. Several
free tickets are available for students wishing to attend the regular season Friday
afternoon concerts of the Boston Symphony Orchestra. Tickets for other special
music performances are also available from time to time.
CLUBS

Student-led clubs and societies celebrate the diversity of the St. Paul’s School student body, and represent the many different academic, artistic, athletic, cultural,
entertainment, political, religious, and service-oriented interests of our students.
72

Through regular meetings, activities, and large-scale events, these organizations
help build and sustain a positive and inclusive school community by providing
opportunities for students to meet new people, engage in enriching extracurricular
activities, and use their free time in healthy ways. Finally, the student-led clubs and
societies structure promotes student leadership development, as all organizations
are not only run by students, but overseen by students. Among other skills, student
leaders improve their abilities to plan, coordinate, execute, and communicate.
SPS student-led clubs and societies are fully inclusive and welcome all new
members (a few clubs, such as musical groups and publications, may determine
membership by audition, application, appointment, or election, but these groups’
selection processes must be approved by the Dean of Students Office). Students
are encouraged to attend the Clubs and Societies Bazaar at the beginning of each
term to join groups. If a student misses the Bazaar, they may always visit the Dean
of Students Office to learn about how to join active clubs on campus.
Both new and existing clubs are required to register with the Dean of Students
Office each year before beginning any club activities (groups are also reminded
never to incur any expenses without first consulting the Dean of Students Office).
All Student Leaders are also required to attend the Clubs and Societies Meeting
each term for their group to continue in good standing. Prior to participation in
certain clubs or societies a custodial parent/guardian may be required to complete
an informed consent or an indemnification agreement.
Reserving a Meeting Space
Students and faculty advisers can reserve spaces for club meetings.
Spaces where students can reserve spaces without adults: community center project rooms and library meeting rooms. For all other meeting spaces, the faculty
adviser can put in the event request and needs to be present for the entire meeting.
To view the calendar and see what spaces are already reserved, go to millville.
sps.edu/allaccess/calendars/events.aspx. To reserve the use of any space at SPS,
use the electronic form on the Millville site at millville.sps.edu, “Log In,” select
“Apps” then “Event Request.” Technical requests require a two-weekday notice.
Questions regarding student clubs and/or activities should be directed to the Dean
of Students Office. Questions regarding the spaces for an activity should be directed
to Ms. Ferman, events manager (ext. 4763 or bferman@sps.edu).
Catering
In order to request a meal or refreshments, you must obtain prior approval from
Dean of Students Office before incurring any expenses. After your request has been
approved, an Event Request Form will need to be completed (students should
work in conjunction with the Dean of Students Office to complete this form, as
an account number will be needed). You may be asked to contact the director
of Food Services, Mr. Kurt Ellison (ext. 4671 or kwellison@sps.edu), to confirm
these arrangements and the menu.
73

STUDENT WORK PROGRAM

St. Paul’s School believes that every student should participate in the Student Work
Program, which affords each individual the opportunity to make a contribution
to the operation of the School. Students are expected to share in duties required
to keep buildings and grounds presentable and to assist in operations necessary
to our community life. The Student Work Program consists of three distinct areas
of responsibility:
House Duties – All students share responsibilities for maintaining clean rooms,
hallways, and common areas in their houses. They take care of recycling and bagging trash in the house, and during house clean-ups, they perform a thorough
cleaning of their rooms and house common areas.
School Service – Several areas of community life, such as the Library, School
Bookstore, and Mishop benefit from regular student assistance. Fifth Form students
not participating in Food Service Support (due to conflicting music commitments)
are selected for these responsibilities according to their interests and abilities.
Food Service Support – Dining hall operations rely on regular student support.
Kitchen helpers for Seated Meal are normally Fifth Formers and are assigned on
a rotating basis. Waiters are typically Fourth Formers and are assigned to work
one or both Seated Meals per week for the school year. In addition, Third Form
students are required to assist Food Service on either Saturday or Sunday during
Anniversary Weekend and Graduation or to fill in as Seated Meal waiters if needed.
Community Center Cleanup – On a rotating basis, houses will be responsible for
overseeing nightly cleanup in the community center.
Work duties and assignments are not optional, and all unexcused absences will
appear on the student’s attendance record.
The Dean of Students Office oversees the Student Work Program. Questions may
be addressed to Mrs. Bonnie Roy at ext. 4811 or broy@sps.edu.
OFF-CAMPUS PROGRAMS

St. Paul’s School believes that a student’s education extends beyond the classroom
and that a change in physical environment enriches perspective. Our educational
philosophy embraces diversity and endorses the principle that as individuals we
learn when we broaden our own beliefs, values, and customs and seek out the
wisdom and experience of others. To foster these values, we encourage our students to pursue an authentic understanding of a culture different from their own
and to engage this new culture with an open mind.
To this end, St. Paul’s School offers a variety of domestic and international offcampus programs to its student body, including service-learning, cultural and
language immersion, music performance, and academic extension programs.

74

These school trips are most often conducted during the first week or two of Spring
Vacation and they provide a wonderful opportunity to explore other cultures and
realities.
Off-Campus program offerings for the school cycle are announced in Chapel, as
well as via e-mail and posters, in early October every year. After securing parental
support, students submit an online application through Millville, found under
Community/Off-Campus Programs, by the deadline indicated, which falls during
the second half of October. Detailed trip information as well as eligibility criteria
for each program and general guidelines are found on the same Millville/Community/Off-Campus Programs link.
Application results are communicated to students by the end of the Fall Term.
Required documentation (including an indemnification agreement) and first
payment are due the first Wednesday of winter term to secure a spot on the trip
roster. Participants attend trip orientation meetings during the winter term to
prepare for their school trip.
Families will incur additional costs related to these programs that are not in tuition. Financial aid for these programs is generally available for eligible students.
COMMUNITY OUTREACH PROGRAM

The Community Outreach Program (COP) at St. Paul’s School challenges students
to live out the intrinsic values of our school’s mission and prayer. The annual
service requirement strives to inculcate a habit of service that will extend beyond
a student’s time at St. Paul’s, ideally strengthening the foundation for good citizenship and fostering active moral engagement within society.
There is a 10 hour annual service requirement to be met by each student within
the St. Paul’s community. The inclusive dates for the annual requirement are from
September 1st of one year until August 31st of the following year – a period of
time covering one academic year, plus the subsequent summer.
For Third, Fourth, and Fifth Formers, any hours earned over the summer break
count towards the annual requirement for the previous academic year. If a student
earns in excess of 10 community service hours, the hours above and beyond the
requirement cannot be applied for any upcoming years and are considered bonus
hours for the current 12 month period.
For rising Sixth Formers, any hours earned over the summer break count towards
either the previous academic year OR the upcoming academic year.
The deadline for which to submit proper documentation of any summer break
volunteer hours is 10 days after the return of all forms in September.

75

Proper documentation includes an e-mail to the COP director verifying service
hours and dates that is sent directly from a student’s site supervisor or submission of a completed COP hours log from the student or supervisor with the site
supervisor’s signature validating the service hours and dates.
A student’s graduation requirement is determined by the year in which he or she
matriculates at St. Paul’s.
• For students who matriculate in their Third Form year, 40 hours of community service is required for graduation.
• For students who matriculate in the Fourth Form year, 30 hours of community
service is required for graduation.
• For students who matriculate in the Fifth Form year, 20 hours of community
service is required for graduation.
Students who fail to meet the annual deadline in September of a given year will be
awarded consequence that can range from On Restriction, On Bounds to receiving
an Incomplete grade for Community Outreach.
COMMUNITY OUTREACH HOURS POSTING

COP Hours are entered by students on Millville. Within “SPSEA” under “COP”
select “Entry.” Start by clicking the “Add Contact” button to create a contact, follow
the prompts for adding project and hours information and check the SPS Honor
Code statement declaring that the information posted is truthful and accurate.
DEFINITION OF OUTREACH

Outreach is an activity of providing services to any populations who might not
otherwise have access to those services. It refers to service that a person performs
for the benefit of his or her local, national and international communities. Community outreach strengthens one’s sense of civic engagement and nationalism. It
also broadens one’s educational, developmental and social goals.
DIFFERENTIATING BETWEEN SCHOOL SERVICE (INREACH)
AND COMMUNITY OUTREACH

School service does not equal community outreach. Community Outreach is
performed as a service EXTERNAL to the school (Fourth Form Outreach Day
and athletic team outreach are the only exceptions). If you participate in school
activities such as student clubs, student leadership roles, tutoring, theater, and
faith groups (including music and art), these are considered school service and do
not count toward required community outreach hours. However, external service
done as a part of a club or organization can be considered community outreach if
approved in advance by the COP office and COP Steering Committee.

76

Expectations and Policies
Academic Expectations and Policies
St. Paul’s School is committed to educating the whole person and preparing students to make contributions in a changing and challenging world. To meet these
commitments, the School offers a curriculum that is interdisciplinary, collaborative, and innovative.
The School believes in a learner-centered classroom, which reflects an understanding of how we learn best. We all learn differently, but our teachers understand
when, how, and why their students learn, and our students share responsibility
for their learning.
We work to instill in our students a lifetime love of learning. Our teachers are
lifelong learners themselves; committed to better understanding cognitive development and using the most up-to-date teaching methods.
We expect our students to challenge themselves in the classroom, knowing that
they are learning in a supportive and collaborative environment. It is in this collaborative environment that we, as a community of learners, can develop a fuller
understanding of the world around us. We work to instill in our students a shared
feeling of responsibility to their community and themselves. We expect that St.
Paul’s graduates leave Millville equipped with the skills necessary to improve their
own learning as well as an interest in doing so.
GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS

The St. Paul’s School diploma is awarded to the student who:
1. enrolls in a minimum of five credits per term;
2. has no more than one Unsatisfactory final grade for any year-long course or
the equivalent;
3. satisfies the requirements listed within one year of their anticipated graduation year at the time of matriculation.
4. misses no more than one term (note: if a student misses more than three
weeks in a term, the students does not receive academic credit for that term).
Students and their advisers have regular conversations about academic goals
and progress. In the spring of each year, students meet with their advisers to
select courses for the following year. Graduation requirements and the interests
and strengths of the student are important considerations when making course
selections.

77

ACADEMICS

Credit Requirements: Arts
1. Matriculate in Third Form: three credits; one-year or three-term sequence in
one discipline within the arts;
2. Matriculate in Fourth Form: three credits; one-year or three-term sequence
in one discipline within the arts;
3. Matriculate in Fifth Form: three credits; one-year or three-term sequence in
one discipline within the arts;
Credit Requirements: Humanities
1. Matriculate in Third Form: 19 credits; sequence of Humanities III (six credits),
Humanities IV (six credits), Humanities V (six credits). Then one required
course in religious studies (one credit)
2. Matriculate in Fourth Form: 13 credits; sequence of Humanities IV (six
credits), Humanities V (six credits). Then one required course in religious
studies (one credit)
3. Matriculate in Fifth Form: seven credits; Humanities V (six credits). Then
one required course in religious studies (one credit)
Credit Requirements: Languages
1. Matriculate in Third Form: nine credits; three-year sequence in the same
language
2. Matriculate in Fourth Form: six credits; two-year sequence in the same
language
3. Matriculate in Fifth Form: three credits in the same language in the same
language
Credit Requirements: Mathematics
1. Matriculate in Third Form: nine credits or through Precalculus (minimum
of three credits earned in residence at St. Paul’s School)
2. Matriculate in Fourth Form: six credits or through Precalculus (minimum
of three credits earned in residence at St. Paul’s School)
3. Matriculate in Fifth Form: three credits earned in residence at St. Paul’s School
Credit Requirements: Science
1. Matriculate in Third Form: nine credits; recommended series of Physics First
(three credits), Chemistry (three credits), Biology (three credits)
2. Matriculate in Fourth Form: six credits; recommended six credits in two
of the following: Physics (three credits), Chemistry (three credits), Biology
(three credits)
3. Matriculate in Fifth Form: three credits
Courses are assigned one credit per term, with the exception that Humanities III,
Humanities IV, and Humanities V are each assigned two credits per term. 100
78

Non-Credit Requirements: Athletics
1. Matriculate in Third Form: eight terms; Third Form year (three terms), Fourth
Form year (three terms), then two additional terms, one of which must be
taken in the Fifth Form year; swim test*
2. Matriculate in Fourth Form: five terms; Fourth Form year (three terms),
then two additional terms, one of which must be taken in the Fifth Form
year; swim test*
3. Matriculate in Fifth Form: two terms; Fifth Form year (at least one term);
additional one term in the Fifth Form year or the Sixth Form year; swim test*
* New students required to pass a swim test within two years of matriculation
Non-Credit Requirements: Community Outreach
1. Matriculate in Third Form: 40 hours; 10 hours required each year in residence
2. Matriculate in Fourth Form: 30 hours; 10 hours required each year in residence
3. Matriculate in Fifth Form: 20 hours; 10 hours required each year in residence
CHANGING COURSE PROGRAMS AND TRANSCRIPTS

Students and advisers work together thoughtfully when selecting courses.
Significant work is put into scheduling these courses. Thus, student-initiated
course changes are not made lightly. Students wanting to make changes must
receive permission from the Dean of Studies and must adhere to the deadlines
published in the Academic Calendar. Teachers may initiate course changes at any
time; however, if a course change is made when fewer than three weeks remain
in the term, the class will be listed on the transcript with a grade. In the case that
a student moves down a level within a class (i.e. Spanish 2H to Spanish 2), the
original course will not appear on the transcript as a separate course, unless a full
term has been completed.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY

Academic integrity is at the foundation of any community of learners. All members
of the SPS community are bound by the same standards of intellectual honesty,
and all are responsible for understanding and acting upon those standards, as
articulated below. When students put their names on their work, they pledge that
the work is their own, in accordance with the School’s Honor Code. Additionally,
students write the following pledge on graded assignments: “I pledge my honor
that I have neither given nor received any unauthorized assistance on this essay/
test/ assignment.”
The St. Paul’s Honor Code has been written by students, and both faculty and
students have a role in upholding and educating the community about the Honor
Code. During the first weeks of school, the Student Council reviews the principles
and the responsibilities that constitute the Honor Code. At the same time, all
teachers in each department discuss the Honor Code’s particular implications for
79

each class, explaining the details of responsible scholarship appropriate to their
courses. Such discussions continue throughout the year. 101
Issues of academic honesty are complex but, in general, St. Paul’s School expects
that every individual will abide by the principles of fair work and will acknowledge
the source of ideas and words. When in doubt, students should seek clarification
from their teacher. In an effort to provide clarity, some examples of academic
dishonesty are listed below:
• Copying someone else’s work, whether homework, quiz, lab, paper, test, or
examination
• Giving or receiving unauthorized assistance on any form of work completed
for credit
• Receiving authorized help with any form of work, without acknowledging
the assistance
• Using unauthorized notes during an examination, test, or quiz
• Giving or obtaining information about an examination, test, or quiz given in
an earlier section of a course
• Submitting work done for one course as original work for another course
• Misrepresenting oneself or one’s work on a college application
• Plagiarism
Plagiarism is the act of taking another’s thinking or writing and using it as one’s
own, whether consciously or unconsciously, deliberately or inadvertently. Plagiarism occurs in the absence of proper citation and generally takes one of three
forms: the verbatim copying; paraphrasing; or the appropriation of an apt word
or phrase. Any form of plagiarism violates the Honor Code, and each individual
bears the responsibility of understanding its definition, its risks, and the means
by which to avoid it. St. Paul’s School recognizes the complexities of plagiarism
and understands its responsibility for helping students learn appropriate methods
of scholarship. Carelessness and absence of intent do not constitute excuses for
plagiarism.
St. Paul’s School students are often encouraged to collaborate with peers and to seek
assistance from faculty; they must acknowledge such collaboration and assistance.
GRADING SYSTEM

There are eight grades at St. Paul’s School: High Honors with Commendation, High
Honors, Honors with Commendation, Honors, High Pass with Commendation,
High Pass, Pass, and Unsatisfactory. A general, school-wide rubric for academic
work can be found below. Independent Study Programs and Advanced Studies
courses are graded Satisfactory or Unsatisfactory.

80

Grading Standards
The following standards outline our grading system in general terms. In addition,
each department has a written statement explaining the type of work required to
receive each grade.
A student earning High Honors with Commendation (HH+):
• Demonstrates exemplary understanding of all course material, including the
application to novel or complex situations
• Demonstrates exemplary performance in all measured skills of the course
• Demonstrates exemplary creativity, insight, curiosity, and original thought in
all areas as appropriate to the subject and level of study
• Demonstrates exemplary engagement and collaboration to the degree that it
inspires and elevates the work of one’s peers
A student earning High Honors (HH):
• Demonstrates superior understanding of the course material, including the
application to novel or complex situations
• Demonstrates superior performance in the measured skills of the course
• Demonstrates superior creativity, insight, curiosity, and original thought as
appropriate to the subject and level of study
• Demonstrates superior engagement and collaboration to the degree that it is
usually worthy of emulation by one’s peers
A student earning Honors with Commendation (H+):
• Demonstrates strong understanding of the course material with some evidence
of application to novel or complex situations
• Demonstrates strong performance in the measured skills of the course
• Demonstrates frequent creativity, insight, curiosity, and original thought as
appropriate to the subject and level of study
• Demonstrates frequent engagement and collaboration that occasionally
elevates the work of one’s peers
A student earning Honors (H):
• Demonstrates solid but not thorough understanding of the course material
with the occasional evidence of application to novel or complex situations
• Demonstrates solid but not consistent performance in the measured skills of
the course
• Demonstrates occasional creativity, curiosity, and original thought as appropriate to the subject and level of study
• Demonstrates occasional engagement and collaboration

81

A student earning High Pass with Commendation (HP+):
• Demonstrates emerging but incomplete understanding of the course material •
Demonstrates emerging but inconsistent performance in the
measured skills of the course
• Demonstrates emerging but inconsistent creativity, curiosity, and original
thought as appropriate to the subject and level of study
• Demonstrates emerging but inconsistent engagement and collaboration
A student earning High Pass (HP):
• Demonstrates acceptable understanding of the course material
• Demonstrates acceptable performance in the measured skills of the course
• Demonstrates acceptable creativity, curiosity, and original thought as appropriate to the subject and level of study
• Demonstrates acceptable engagement and collaboration
A student earning Pass (P):
• Demonstrates minimally acceptable understanding of the course material
• Demonstrates minimally acceptable performance in the measured skills of
the course
• Demonstrates minimal creativity, curiosity, and original thought as appropriate to the subject and level of study
• Demonstrates minimal engagement and collaboration
A student earning Unsatisfactory (U):
• Demonstrates unsatisfactory understanding of the course material
• Demonstrates unsatisfactory performance in the measured skills of the course
• Demonstrates unsatisfactory engagement and collaboration
Grade Reporting
The academic year is divided into three marking periods – each approximately
ten weeks long. Grades are reported to students and sent to parents at the end of
each of the three marking periods. Midway through each marking period, Progress
Reports in the form of narrative comments are provided to advisers, students, and
parents to indicate the student’s progress. A week later “Inside Grades” are made
available. Progress Reports, term, and final grades are available in the parent portal;
sign in at www.sps.edu/parents.
Academic Honors
Student GPAs are reported on SPS transcripts. The GPA calculation is:

82

TESTIMONIALS

Testimonials are awarded annually to students in the Third, Fourth, and Fifth
Forms who meet the following standards:
2nd Testimonials – 4.5+ GPA
1st Testimonials – 5.75+ GPA
1st Testimonials with Honor – 6.25+ GPA
NOTE – Testimonials are calculated using course grades (final grades for a one-term,
two-term or three-term course).
DIPLOMA HONORS

Diplomas cum laude are awarded at Graduation to graduating students based on
the academic records of their Fifth and Sixth Form years. Honors of Cum Laude,
Magna Cum Laude and Summa Cum Laude are determined by the Academic
Department Heads. More specific criteria will be made available later in the year.
Distinctions
Diplomas with distinction are awarded at Graduation at the determination of
each department. Distinction in any department will be awarded only to students
whose superior effort, achievement, and commitment deserve special recognition.
Grade Scale			
before 2016-17
Current Grade Scale
7 PT. GPA
		
High Honors with Commendation (HH+)
7
High Honors (HH)
		
High Honors (HH)
6
		
Honors (H)
		

Honors with Commendation (H+)

5

Honors (H)

4

		
High Pass (HP)
		

High Pass with Commendation (HP+)

3

High Pass (HP)

2

Pass (P)

Pass (P)

1

Unsatisfactory (U)

Unsatisfactory (U)

0

RESPONSES TO INSUFFICIENT ACADEMIC PROGRESS

Academic Warning
A student is placed on Academic Warning if he or she earns any Pass or Unsatisfactory grades on Inside Grades.
When a student is placed on Academic Warning, his or her adviser notifies the
parents and the student works with his or her adviser to develop an academic
83

plan to be turned into the Dean of Studies by a given deadline. This plan should
include specific, agreed-upon action steps and may include a time management
plan, times and locations for teacher extra help, plans for student tutoring, peer
study groups, study hall or room study restrictions. Any students missing the
deadline will be placed on restrictions (early check-in) until the academic plan
is completed and submitted. This plan will remain in effect through the end of
the term, at which time the student and his or her adviser may adjust the plan.
Academic Review
If a student earns one Unsatisfactory grade or more than one Pass at the end of a
term, the student will be referred to the Student Review Committee (See description of Student Review Committee in section Adult Resources for Support). The
Student Review Committee examines the student’s grade history in the context
of the student’s overall experience. The Student Review Committee considers
teacher comments, adviser reports, scholastic reports, student/adviser plan, and
any other relevant information such as attendance and citizenship. Following its
discussions, recommendations from the Student Review Committee will be communicated to the student, adviser and parents. The Student Review Committee may
place a student on Academic Probation, make a recommendation that the family
consider withdrawal, or recommend to the Rector that the student be dismissed.
Academic Probation
When a student is placed on Academic Probation, it is an indication that the
Student Review Committee is concerned about the student’s ability to meet with
success in our academic program. If the student is to remain at the school, the
student must meet the conditions specified by the Student Review Committee.
Academic Dismissal
Students who remain on Academic Probation may be dismissed from the School.
If a student is dismissed for academic reasons he or she may only reapply to the
School after consultation with the Dean of Studies.
ACADEMIC SUPPORT

The Academic Support Office is designed to enhance the opportunity for all St.
Paul’s School students to strengthen their skills to enable them to meet their personal goals and strive to reach their potential, while adhering to the demanding
standards imposed by the School.
Students can make appointments by e-mailing Mrs. Daniels at kdaniels@sps.edu.
Students are also strongly encouraged to ask their advisers to attend meetings
when possible.
Services available include:
• instruction in organization, time management, study skills, test-taking strategies, and other academic skills
• coordination of educational testing
84

•
•
•
•

development of student support plans
teaching of self-advocacy skills
coordination of standardized testing accommodations
additional support includes Study Hall, Teacher Extra Help, and Peer Tutors

Study Hall
A quiet and monitored Study Hall is offered in Ohrstrom Library four nights each
week: Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday during study hours (7:30 to 9 p.m.).
Study hall is also available during the academic day, Monday through Friday.
Students may be assigned to Study Hall by their advisers or they may self-refer.
Teacher Extra Help
Students are encouraged to meet regularly with their teachers for extra help.
Teachers will communicate the availability of their extra help sessions.
Peer Tutoring
Peer tutors are currently available in the Mathematics, Sciences, and Languages
Departments. If interested in working with a peer tutor, students should communicate with their teacher and/or adviser.
Private Tutoring
On occasion students may engage a tutor or academic counseling (SAT prep, etc.)
unaffiliated with St. Paul’s School. These meetings may not take place on campus,
unless a member of the SPS community is tutoring the student.
Accommodations
The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) guarantees certain protections and
rights of equal access to programs and services for students with disabilities who
are otherwise qualified for admission to St. Paul’s School. In order to access these
rights, a student (or his or her parent) must present documentation that is current and sufficient to establish that the student’s condition(s) substantially limits
a major life activity. St. Paul’s School follows the guidelines for documentation of
the Educational Testing Service, which can be found at www.ets.org. Once this
documentation is received, a committee consisting of the director of academic support, the vice rector for school life, the dean of students, the medical director, and
a faculty member will review the documentation to determine if the condition(s)
rises to a level of constituting a disability under the ADA, and, if so, what requested
accommodations are necessary and reasonable in this educational setting.
Students new to St. Paul’s who have had accommodations at their previous school
must submit current documentation to the director of academic support for review
and assessment. Accommodations at a student’s previous school, however, do not
guarantee that St. Paul’s will agree that the student qualifies as an individual with
a disability under the ADA or that St. Paul’s will necessarily honor the accommodations the student received at his or her prior school. St. Paul’s uses a team
approach in making disability and accommodation determinations, taking into
85

consideration the student’s current performance in this academic setting.
Occasionally, a disability in the form of a learning disability, or a health condition
that involves a long-term injury or illness, may be identified or arise. A student’s
teachers, an adviser, or the student might ask for information at the Academic
Support Office about pursuing accommodations. Additionally, students identified through our Student Teacher Assistance Team (STAT) – a group that meets
at the request of a student’s adviser to gather multiple sources of input and offer
advice in support of a student’s particular needs – might refer students for further
testing. Identifying and funding the necessary evaluations are the responsibility
of the family.
In order to apply to the College Board or ACT for accommodations, students and
their parents are encouraged to work with the Director of Academic Support to
submit the appropriate forms at least eight weeks before the scheduled testing
period to the College Board or ACT for their evaluation.
INDEPENDENT STUDY PROGRAM

The ISP provides a means for Sixth Formers to learn from study and experience
outside the classroom. Projects may be at the School, in Concord, or away. They
may replace any number of courses and run for one to three terms. Students design
their projects under the guidance of the ISP director. See the program director
for specific details.
ADVANCED STUDIES

Sixth Formers have an additional educational opportunity in Advanced Studies to
pursue their passions in a particular discipline when the area of interest is beyond
the standard courses offered by the department. It is expected that students have
already pursued the courses offered in the standard curriculum before applying
for an Advanced Studies course. Interested students should meet with the Dean
of Studies to learn about the application process and be sure to adhere to the
deadlines posted in the Academic Calendar.
SCHOOL TRIPS

Any group of St. Paul’s School students traveling together with a St. Paul’s faculty
member constitutes a School Trip and, therefore, requires approval from the
School, regardless of whether or not the School is providing funding. All School
Trips must go through an approval process, which is overseen by the Off-Campus
Programs coordinator.
OFF CAMPUS PROGRAMS

Off-Campus Programs, including student exchange programs and school trips, are
an extension of the student experience at St. Paul’s School and as such, all pertinent
student handbook policies and expectations as well as specific trip policies shared
with participating students and their parents, are fully applicable and enforced.
The school facilitates exchanges with schools in England (Eton College), France
86

(École Alsacienne), Germany (Humboldt School), and Japan (Seikei School and
the Toin School).
SCHOOL YEAR ABROAD (SYA)

School Year Abroad (SYA) is a yearlong program designed to give students a chance
to study in France, Spain, Italy, or China. Due to our knowledge of the program,
the School facilitates participation in the SYA program for our students.
TERM AWAY

Occasionally, a student wishes to enroll in an academic program other than School
Year Abroad or SPS exchange programs for a term. Such a request does not fall
under the guidelines of Off-Campus Programs, School Year Abroad, Independent
Study, or Advanced Studies programs and requires the special permission of the
academic department heads. A student may request to take part in programs that
fall within the second half of the year or are full-year. In order to apply, students
must meet with the dean of studies and develop a proposal to be shared with
the department heads by the end of the winter term of the year preceeding the
program year.
EARLY GRADUATION

In extraordinary circumstances, a student may request to graduate at the conclusion of the Fifth Form year. Any request to graduate a year early must be made
by the end of the fall term of the Fifth Form year, and a student will be informed
of the decision by January 15. Please contact the dean of studies for guidelines
on making such a request to the School.
ADDING AN ACADEMIC YEAR

In extraordinary circumstances, a request to add an additional year of study at
St. Paul’s School may be made by a student. Any request to add a year of study
must be submitted by a student by May 1 for the following academic year. The
opportunity to add an additional year of study at St. Paul’s School is available
only to Third, Fourth and Fifth Formers. Please contact the Dean of studies for
guidelines on making such a request to the School.
UNEXCUSED ABSENCES AND ACADEMIC ASSESSMENTS

Students who have an unexcused absence for a class on the day of an assessment
will lose 10 points on the assessment for every 24 hours or parts thereof that the
assessment is late, or untaken. It is the student’s responsibility, not the teacher’s,
to make arrangements to make up the missed work.
MAJOR ASSESSMENTS

In order to assure that students can do their best work in all courses, all assessments are due during a scheduled class meeting – never late at night or over the
weekend. Students are never required to complete more than two major graded
assignments on any day. Major assessments include chapter or unit tests, papers
or essays of three pages in length, major laboratory reports, etc. Major assessments
87

do not include vocabulary quizzes in languages, pop quizzes, or homework quizzes. If a student learns from a teacher that a third major assessment is expected
on a day in which they already have two major assessments, the student should
speak with the teachers involved. In this case, the student has the right to request
an extension for the assessment that is due in the latest class period of the day.
HOLIDAYS

Holidays are provided each term as an opportunity for students and teachers to
relax, take a break from the routine of the academic program, and enjoy one another’s company, our grounds, and community. No assignments will be collected
or expected on a holiday. Once a holiday has been announced, students should
expect that assignments and assessments scheduled for that day will be expected
the day of the next class meeting. Class syllabi for affected classes are shifted back
one day, and assignments are not doubled up to make up for the lost class time
because of the holiday.
On holidays, athletic practices are optional for varsity teams only; JV teams are
not allowed to have practice. Practices are not allowed to be longer than one and
one-half hours. When Cricket Holiday is called in the Fall Term, new students are
required to participate in the walk around the grounds with the Rector.
WEEKEND RECESS

Weekend recesses are scheduled once each term: Family Weekend, Winter Recess,
and Spring Recess. Students should expect no more than a typical assignment for
the first class meeting after these weekend recesses. Faculty members will not
schedule major or unusual assignments or assessments for this first class after
the recess so that students can enjoy the break from the normal routine of their
academic program.
VACATIONS AND RECESSES
THERE ARE THREE SCHOOL VACATIONS SCHEDULED EACH YEAR:
THANKSGIVING VACATION (ONE WEEK), WINTER VACATION (THREE
WEEKS), AND SPRING VACATION (THREE WEEKS). STUDENTS WILL
NOT BE EXPECTED TO COMPLETE ACADEMIC WORK DURING THESE
VACATIONS. FACULTY MEMBERS MAY SUGGEST THAT STUDENTS WHO
ARE STRUGGLING IN PARTICULAR CLASSES MIGHT USE THIS TIME
TO REVIEW MATERIAL NOT YET MASTERED, OR WORK AHEAD IN A
CLASS. SUMMER ACADEMIC WORK

In general, it is the hope of the faculty that students use the summer vacation for
relaxation, restoration, and adventure. To this end, the School’s expectations for
summer academic work are minimal. Rising Fourth and Fifth Form students are
asked to complete summer reading assignments in preparation for Humanities

88

IV and V. In addition, the Scholastic Committee may suggest that students who
have struggled academically review material or work ahead to preview material
in a particular class for the next year.
Should students be interested in pursuing academic work in order to skip ahead
in the program, they should be in contact with the appropriate department head.
While, in some cases, coursework completed in the summer may move a student
forward in their course of study, St. Paul’s school credit is never awarded for courses
completed elsewhere and they are not represented on our transcript.
FACULTY RESEARCH AND STUDENT PARTICIPATION

As faculty continually work to develop their pedagogy through participation in
graduate degree programs, opportunities arise when students may be involved in
research. In order to balance the obligations to improve and inform teaching and
learning while also promoting student safety, all proposals involving the use of
students in research must be submitted to the Internal Review Board for Student
Research (vice rector for faculty, dean of studies, and dean of teaching and learning) for approval.

Major School Expectations
For information about Responses to these violations, please see Responses to
Violations.
St. Paul’s School expects all members of our community to strive to live according
to the values embodied in our School Prayer and School Honor Code:
• Be Kind: be Thoughtful, Unselfish, and Compassionate
• Live Honorably: be Respectful, Responsible, and Safe
• Be Truthful
These standards have characterized St. Paul’s School and its students for more than
150 years. By choosing to join this community, you elect to meet these expectations. The choice to attend St. Paul’s School represents your decision to respect
these ideals and to be shaped by them. Disregard for the School’s expectations
jeopardizes your place at the School. In choosing to attend St. Paul’s School, you
agree to live in accordance with the School’s expectations.
FUNCTIONAL SKILL EXPECTATIONS

Although we recognize that adolescence is a period of growth and development,
we believe that students must possess basic functional skills and capacities in
order to engage successfully in a fully residential school environment. These basic requirements are best described through our framework of Social-Emotional
Competencies and Skills.
Self-Management

89

Students must be able to:
• regulate one’s sleep
• wake oneself
• complete assigned tasks within given deadlines
• meet required obligations
• maintain a healthy and safe environment
• practice basic self-care
• control negative impulses
Relationship Skills
Students must be able to:
• share a room and common living space with peers
• live with and respect individuals from diverse backgrounds
• establish and maintain healthy boundaries with peers
• communicate effectively with peers and adults
• be truthful, respectful, and kind in interactions with others
Positive Decision Making
Students must be able to:
• make use of academic and health resources as deemed necessary by the School
• live in alignment with our school’s values to be kind and live honorably
Shared responsibilities of the St. Paul’s School family include:
• Communication between families and adviser as primary contact with the
School.
• Empowerment of students to take responsibility for their own education and
experience.
• Respect during interactions with the School.
• Support of the School’s policies and procedures which guide students’ education and development.
Being clear about expectations and policies will hopefully inspire positive participation in all areas of the school, promote learning, and encourage the understanding
that being kind, living honorably, and standing up is at the heart of our community. The sections below are included to clarify the community’s expectations of
all students, regardless of age and including those who have turned 18. Later in
the book, there is a more specific list of rules, expectations, and consequences
for breaking them.
The rules and procedures outlined in this book apply under normal circumstances.
However, from time to time there are situations that require immediate, nonstandard responses. Therefore, the School reserves the right to deal with instances
of other inappropriate behavior in a timely and efficient manner, taking actions
90

deemed to be in the best interests of the School, its faculty, and its students. This
document as written does not limit the authority of the School to alter its rules
and procedures to suit any unusual or changed circumstances.
Living honorably is a foundational value on which this community rests – a value
found in our mission and School prayer. This means...safe, respectful, responsible,
inclusive…. We expect honorable behavior in all areas of school life, formal and
informal, curricular, and extracurricular. Kind and honorable interactions between students, parents, faculty, and staff are essential to sustaining the healthy
functioning of our school.
STUDENT ACCESS AND SCHOOL EXPECTATIONS REGARDING
LEGAL AUTHORITY

The School requires that all individuals with authority to make legal decisions
(hereafter referred to as custodial parent/guardian) regarding the Student’s education, medical care and residence have been properly identified by the School.
Parents/guardians who are confirmed to have authority to make legal decisions for
a student will be the only individuals who may grant permission to leave school
(see Leaving School Grounds section), sign informed consent/indemnification
forms or grant permission for medical treatment (see Clark House section).
In the event of divorce or separation, it is the policy of the School to provide the
custodial parent/guardian, the non­custodial parent, and stepparents equal access to
all the official records and reports regarding the child as well as all school announcements and related information. Moreover, each is granted access to the child, to
the teachers, and to administrators. Such access is provided without notification
to other parties and regardless of the party or parties named who claim financial
responsibility. Exceptions to this policy are undertaken only when necessary to
comply with applicable law and/or when so ordered in writing by a court of law.
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA) STATEMENT

Members of the St. Paul’s School community come from many backgrounds and
bring many different gifts. As part of that diversity, St. Paul’s School enrolls qualified students with documented physical, psychological, and learning disabilities
and other health issues. The School recognizes that some accommodations will be
necessary to ensure access to its academic and other resources and is committed
to providing that support for students legally entitled to it.
Although the School does not offer special programs for students with disabilities,
the School is committed to providing reasonable accommodations in academics,
housing, and other programs and services to address the disability-related needs
of otherwise qualified students with disabilities. Reasonable accommodations are
interventions (excluding personal services) that are designed to enable students
with disabilities to enjoy equal access to the full array of programs and supports
offered at SPS without creating an undue burden on the School, fundamentally
changing the nature of a St. Paul’s School education, or altering its standards.
91

MAJOR SCHOOL EXPECTATIONS AND RULES

(Examples of violations of major expectations include, but are not limited to):
Community
• Actions threatening or posing a risk of harm to the health, safety, or well-being
of self or other persons. Unacceptable behavior includes without limitation,
barring access to student rooms, tampering with alarms or fire safety equipment, smoking in a building, burning incense or candles, or the use of fire in
any School building in an area not specifically designated for that purpose.
Also, the unauthorized use or possession of weapons, firearms, explosives,
or dangerous combustibles or explosives on the SPS grounds is not permitted under any circumstances. Hunting is not permitted on any part of the
grounds.
• Actions potentially dangerous to people or property, including violation of
fire regulations; destruction or defacing of property; and possession, use, or
acquisition of any type of weapon, weapon facsimile, ammunition, fireworks,
or other hazardous materials.
• Violation of any federal, state, or local laws
• Disrespecting the rights of others
• Physical or verbal assault of another person, including without limitation
fighting, bullying, or hazing, is prohibited. Any type of harassment violation
of privacy (including the use of any recording or imaging technologies), or
actions or communications (verbal or written) constituting harassment of
any kind.
• Malicious, threatening, or defamatory remarks of any kind.
• Possession of school keys or proximity card that are not your own or knowledge of students in possession of keys.
• Participation in or facilitation of any game, “tradition,” or practice of sexual
solicitation or sexual conquest under any name
• Disrespectful and inappropriate documentation of relationships
• Organizing or hosting rule-breaking activity in a student’s home, room, or car,
whether on or off school grounds, even when the student is not participating
in the actual rule breaking
• Accessing unauthorized spaces on school grounds (roofs, school guest quarters, vacant school apartments, etc.)
• Failing to be present in your house at check-in and remaining in the house
afterwards. For example, leaving the house after check-in and before 6am
the next day for any reason.
• Unauthorized dormitory room visiting or hosting of visitors outside of permissible hours

92

• Jeopardizing the welfare or good name of the School and engaging in certain
activities, even outside of School hours or off School property.
• Behaving in a manner inconsistent with the School’s expectations while away
on a weekend and during vacations.
• Remaining in the presence of others who are breaking rules and being willfully blind to rule-breaking activity.
• Theft of goods or services; misuse of electronic communication devices, credit/
debit cards, or ID cards, possession of ID cards that contain false information.
• Serious or repeated absenteeism in a single term from required school appointments or repeated terms of poor attendance.
• Failure to live up to the terms of probation.
• An accumulation of offenses that have resulted in repeated disciplinary
responses or otherwise clearly indicate an unwillingness or inability to live
within school behavioral guidelines.
• Being dishonest and/or engaging in any type of deceitful behavior, including
but not limited to lying, cheating, plagiarizing, or facilitating cheating; fraud
of any kind, including, for example, deceit regarding permission forms, or
falsifying sign-in; or failure to cooperate fully in an investigation conducted
by the school. Any form of misrepresentation to adults on campus.
Drugs, Alcohol and Tobacco
• The possession, use, or testing positively for use of alcohol or drugs, including nicotine; the possession of paraphernalia or containers associated with
alcohol or drug use, including e-cigarettes or vaporizers; the abuse or misuse
of any illegal substance, any legal over-the counter or “homemade” preparations or remedies for purposes other than legitimate medical treatment other
substances, including inhalants, or prescription drugs, including those used
to treat ADD or ADHD; or being in the presence of alcohol or drugs
• Remaining in the presence of the use or possession of alcohol, nicotine, or
any illegal substance (or any paraphernalia or containers associated with their
use while at School). All residents of a student room are equally responsible
for possession of alcohol, nicotine, and other illegal substances that are discovered in that room and unclaimed
• Purchasing, selling, or providing illegal or prescription drugs or alcohol
• Abuse of prescription medicine or deliberately circumventing the School’s
medication management policy. Permissions
• Leaving School Grounds without appropriate permission.
• Serious or repeated violation of rules regarding signing in and off of School
Grounds

93

Technology
• Violation of the School’s Acceptable Use Policy for technology, including
any use or misuse of the School’s computers or computer websites, voicemail, electronic messaging systems, electronic mail, the School’s Internet or
Intranet sites (personal, at home, or at school) network, telecommunications
equipment, or radio station which do – or could – impact the welfare of any
member of the School community or the reputation or functioning of the
School; failure to comply with copyright laws; repeated or excessive downloading and sharing of any copyrighted material (movies, music, video, etc.)
and/or any destructive, inappropriate, and/or hacking behavior. Downloading,
distributing, or sharing sexually explicit material. Students are responsible
for all content contained on or communicated from personal devices.
Mail and Privacy
Certain materials are not appropriate in a school environment, and their possession at the School likely will result in disciplinary action. In particular, students
are not permitted to have, display, or have sent to them at the School any of the
following: controlled substances (drugs, either illegal or prescription for which
the student does not have a valid prescription; drug kits, alcohol and tobacco
products), weapons (including firearms, edged weapons, and/or martial arts
devices), explosives (including fireworks), highly flammable materials, or living
animals. In addition, students are expected to refrain from bringing to the School
or having delivered to them at school by mail, common carrier, or e-mail publications and/or catalogs devoted to, or containing more than minimal amounts
of material depicting, describing, or advertising pornography, weapons, or hate
crimes/abusive behavior.
Students should realize that their mail, including periodicals and packages, is
routinely handled by staff in the process of making it available in the School’s
post office. While staff members are instructed to regard all mail and packages
directed to students as the confidential property of the recipient, they also have
been instructed to bring to the dean of students any package or periodical that
appears to contain materials not permitted on the School grounds. To protect
the privacy of the recipient, staff has been instructed not to break intact seals on
any package or periodical to determine whether it appears to contain improper
material. However, students should be aware that a package or periodical already
may be open when it arrives on school grounds and/or its wrapping may contain
information that suggests it contains improper material. When a package or
periodical suspected of containing improper material is brought to the Dean of
Students Office, the dean will invite the student to meet to discuss the contents
of the package or periodical and may ask the student to open the package or
periodical with the dean. If the package appears to be medication, it will be sent
to the health center and a member of the medical staff will invite the student to
meet and open the package together.

94

STUDENT STANDARDS

In addition to the Major School Expectations and Rules, the School also has
general Student Standards.
Examples of Violations of Student Standards include:
• Failure to meet all of your commitments, including required Chapel services,
academic classes, athletics, Seated Meals, and work duty
• Keeping or driving a car or motorcycle in Concord or its vicinity or traveling
with another student who is inappropriately driving
• Hitchhiking
• Leaving school grounds during town hours without properly signing out in
REACH
• Possessing pornographic and/or sexually explicit materials
• Building structures of any kind on school property
• Use of pagers, portable two-way electronic communication devices, or laser
directional lights on the grounds
• Use of smart phones, mobile phones and personal electronic devices (iPods,
etc.) is restricted. There is no cell phone/smart phone or headphone usage
while on the paths, in the Uppers Dining Halls and Common Room, and there
are to be no active phone conversations inside academic buildings.
• Failure to wear a properly buckled helmet when riding a bicycle, skateboard,
in-line skates or other transportation of this nature
• Disrespecting any School property, including student rooms, house common
areas, and all other such spaces. This property is supervised by school personnel and can be searched at the discretion of the School administration and
house advisers when it is determined to be in the best interest of the School
community.
• Failure to swim in designated areas with a buddy, jumping off bridges, trampolines, and other structures, and/or forcing others into the water.
• Failure to have a Personal Floatation Device (PFD) for each person in the
boat when using any watercraft on School waters Each PFD must be in good
condition, be the proper size for the intended wearer, and most importantly,
be readily accessible. All boats and watercraft must be registered at the Dean
of Students Office.
• Non-compliance with Delivery Expectations and taxi/rideshare drop off and
pickup locations on school grounds
• Failure to conduct yourself in a respectful and courteous manner and to support a healthy, safe and learning environment, including without limitation
being insubordinate, using abusive language, inappropriate gestures, derogatory remarks, disruptive behavior, and other similar conduct.

95

Alcohol and Drug Testing Policy and Procedures
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING

Students are expected to be completely drug and alcohol free while they are enrolled
at St. Paul’s School. They may not sell, distribute, use, possess, or be under the
influence of illicit drugs, alcohol, nicotine or other substances that are used in a
way other than prescribed. As a condition of the student’s enrollment at St. Paul’s
School, parent(s) and students are required to authorize the School to conduct drug
and alcohol testing of the student by Breathalyzer, urine or hair sample, or saliva.
St. Paul’s School reserves the right to test students for drugs and alcohol randomly
or in the following circumstances: (1) the student exhibits drug or alcohol influenced behavior; (2) the student has a history of drug or alcohol use at St. Paul’s
School; (3) there are significant changes in the student’s academic or social functioning; (4) there are signs of psychological distress; or (5) upon written request
by the parent(s) of the student.
If a student has been caught using a substance or has admitted through the School’s
Sanctuary Policy to have used, the student will be placed on a list to be randomly
tested. Each week several students from the list will be selected through a random
number generator to undergo one of the methods of drug testing at the family’s
expense. If, during the school year, a student is randomly selected more than 10
times, the School will incur the cost of further testing.
If a student tests positive for illicit substances, whether or not it can be demonstrated that the substance was used on the grounds, the student is considered to be
in violation of a Major School Rule, and will be subject to appropriate disciplinary
action, up to and including separation from the School.
Parents will be responsible for all costs incurred for evaluation, counseling, and
drug testing services provided through Clark House.

Healthy Relationships
At SPS, we strive to help students develop close connections to a diverse group
of acquaintances, classmates, teammates, and friends. We expect all relationships, including those that could become sexual, to be healthy. We seek to create
a community of kindness and respect, acknowledging that an intentionally diverse community can present opportunities and challenges involving race, class,
gender, religion, sexuality, differing abilities, or any other core issue of identity.
We address these challenges in many contexts, including Chapel, LINC Days,
adviser and house meetings, informal conversations with teachers and advisers,
and more. Awareness and acceptance of identity – one’s own and others’ – is a
central developmental task of adolescence. Sexuality is a particularly important
and complicated element of this process. With that in mind, as well as the legal
requirements of the state of New Hampshire, we have established policies to help
students manage matters of sexuality safely and responsibly.
96

SEXUAL INTIMACY

For high school students, the issue of sexual intimacy is a complicated one.
In keeping with the School’s developmental and residential life philosophy, we
understand that adolescence is a time during which young people develop their
personal and sexual identity. The School also recognizes that sexual intimacy is but
one piece of a much larger constellation of elements that make up an individual’s
sexual identity and the expression of that identity. We respect our students and
seek to affirm and support them in their search for appropriate expressions of self
and affection towards others.
To that end, we provide age-appropriate sexual health educational programming
for students, and training for faculty so that adults in the community can provide appropriate support to students as they explore issues of sexuality, healthy
relationships, and gender identity and expression. Faculty and Clark House staff
support the faculty as a whole in this work and are available to discuss reproductive health and other related issues. In addition, with parental permission, Clark
House medical staff may provide reproductive health services to students.
While we recognize that healthy romantic relationships may involve a range of
physical intimacies, we must be clear that in a boarding school there are some special considerations, applicable to all students regardless of their sexual orientation:
• We are concerned about the physical health of students and wish to protect
them from sexual behavior that may lead to sexually transmitted infections
and/or to pregnancy.
• We are aware of the emotional implications that accompany early sexual
relationships.
• Within our community, there is a diversity of values and moral beliefs around
the issues of sexuality and sexual behavior.
• Students living closely in residence deserve privacy, knowledge of when visitors will be present in their houses, and freedom from unwanted exposure to
the intimate sexual behaviors of others.
• All actions of a romantic couple should remain respectful, consensual, and
appropriate at all times. Hand-holding, having one’s arm around a partner,
or a quick kiss are examples of appropriate expressions of affection.
• Overly passionate displays of affection (e.g., prolonged touching or kissing,
the removal of clothing) are not appropriate.
• All community members are expected to be respectful and appropriate when
discussing sexual intimacy. Inappropriate language would include the use of
words that objectify, demean, or imply competition or conquest.
• The School is aware of the serious physical, emotional, social, and legal
implications that can accompany early sexual relationships. Therefore, the
School strongly encourages students to postpone sexual activity.

97

RESPECT AND CONSENT

Students must agree to guidelines that cultivate mutual respect and establish
consent by both parties in every instance, including sexual activity.
1. In New Hampshire, a person under 16 years of age cannot give consent to
sexual activity. In accordance with NH law, the School is required to report
all instances of sexual abuse or suspected statutory rape to the local authorities. Because the age of legal consent in NH is 16, the School must report all
sexual activity involving a student under 16 years of age.
2. Consent cannot be inferred from the absence of a “no.”
3. Consent to some acts does not imply consent to others, nor does past consent
to a given act imply present or future consent.
4. Consent must be ongoing and can be revoked at any time.
5. Consent cannot be obtained by threat, coercion, or force. Agreement under
such circumstances does not constitute consent.
6. Consent cannot be obtained from someone who is asleep or otherwise mentally or physically incapacitated, whether due to alcohol, drugs, or some
other condition.

Harassment, Discrimination, Hazing, Assault, and
Bullying and the Community Conduct Board (CCB)
Harassment, discrimination, hazing, bullying, assault and discrimination are serious offenses, prohibited by federal and/or state law as well as the policies of St.
Paul’s School. St. Paul’s School will not tolerate harassment, discrimination, hazing, assault or bullying of any kind, whether it is of a general nature or consistent
with any of the specific examples described below. Where inappropriate conduct is
found, St. Paul’s School will act promptly with the goal of eliminating the conduct
and taking whatever other corrective action it deems necessary.
Through education and intervention, St. Paul’s School makes every effort to
achieve an educational environment that is free from harassment, discrimination,
bullying, assault and hazing.
HARASSMENT OR DISCRIMINATION

Illegal harassment or discrimination is conduct or behavior which relates to
race, color, religion, sex, age, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity,
genetic information, veteran status, physical or mental disability, national origin,
or ancestry or other protected category and is personally offensive or threatening,
impairs morale, or is so pervasive or severe that it has the purpose or effect of:
• Creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment
• Interfering unreasonably with an individual’s academic performance
• Creating a situation where academic decisions of a student depend on his or
her submitting to and/or not objecting to the behavior
98

Discrimination and harassment can take many forms. Examples include, but are
not limited to:
• limiting opportunities to participate in certain clubs, teams, or activities based
on certain characteristics;
• slurs, jokes, statements, remarks, questions, gestures, pictures, e-mails, texts,
or cartoons regarding legally protected status that are derogatory or demeaning to an individual’s or group’s characteristics or that promote stereotypes;
• demands for sexual favors in exchange for favorable treatment, academic
rewards, or continued participation in a program or project;
• offensive or unwelcome sexual flirtation, advances, or touching;
• obscene, demeaning, or abusive commentary about an individual’s body or
other personal characteristics;
• audiotaping or videotaping individuals in potentially embarrassing situations
and/or forwarding such taped material to others; and
• responding to refusals to provide sexual favors with verbal, emotional, or
physical abuse.
Often harassing behavior results from ignorance or insensitivity to the feelings of
others. Being mindful of how one’s behavior is affecting others and communicating the effect of the behavior of others are good ways to minimize harassment.
BULLYING

Bullying is characterized by a power differential and involves aggressive behavior
that is repeated and intended to cause harm. Bullying is defined as the repeated use
by one or more students of a written, verbal, or electronic expression or a physical
act or gesture or any combination thereof, directed at a target that:
• causes physical or emotional harm to the targeted student or damage to the
targeted student’s property;
• places the targeted student in reasonable fear of harm to himself or herself
or of damage to his or her property;
• creates a hostile environment at school for the targeted student;
• infringes on the rights of the targeted student at school; or
• materially and substantially disrupts the educational process or the orderly
operation of the school.
Bullying can include, but is not limited to:
• hitting, slapping, pushing, and other physical conduct that causes bodily
harm;
• threatening in a manner that puts someone down or is cruel;
• deliberately excluding someone as a way to humiliate or demean them;
• sexually harassing conduct;
• hazing activities.
99

CYBER-BULLYING

Cyber-bullying is bullying through the use of technology or electronic devices such
as telephones, cell phones, computers, fax machines, and the Internet. It includes,
but is not limited to, e-mail, instant messages, text messages, and Internet postings, whether on a web page, in a blog, any form of social media, or otherwise.
Cyber-bullying may include, but is not limited to:
• taking a private e-mail, instant message, or text message and forwarding it,
or threatening to forward it to others or posting it where others can see it to
embarrass or intimidate a person;
• spreading hurtful rumors online about another person;
• threatening or insulting through aggressive e-mails, instant messages, or text
messages;
• posting or threatening to post embarrassing pictures of someone online
without his or her permission; and
• creating a web page or blog in which the creator assumes the identity of another person or the knowing impersonation of another person as the author
of posted content or messages, if the creation or impersonation causes any
of the conditions listed in the definition of bullying listed above.
HAZING

Hazing is defined as conduct or a method of initiation into any student organization which willfully or recklessly endangers the physical or mental health of any
student or other person, regardless of consent of the individuals involved.
Examples of hazing include, but are not limited to: whipping, beating, branding,
forced calisthenics, exposure to the weather, forced consumption of any food,
liquor, beverage, drug, or other substance, or any other brutal treatment or forced
physical activity which is likely to adversely affect the physical health or safety of
a student or other person, or which subjects a student or other person to extreme
mental stress, including extended deprivation of sleep or rest or extended isolation.
While harassment, discrimination, bullying and hazing all fall within a spectrum
of interpersonal aggression and sometimes violence, they are not synonymous.
Hazing is predicated on inclusion and can sometimes be overlooked because it
can appear as neither particularly aggressive, nor as intended to harm. In addition,
hazing can sometimes be confusing for students to understand because they might
consent to the behavior. It is important to note that because hazing involves a
group context and the power differential of current members and those seeking
membership or acceptance by the group, peer pressure and a coercive environment can exist and interfere with consent. Therefore, conduct can be deemed to
be hazing regardless of a person’s willingness to participate.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT

Any and all sexual advances or conduct between adults and students is prohibited.
100

Sexual harassment is defined as sexual advances (either verbal or physical), requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature
which affects a student’s emotional well-being or interferes with a student’s academic performance or participation in co-curricular or extra-curricular activities,
or which has the purpose or effect of creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive
learning or social environment.
By the same token, harassment of an adult by a student or by another adult may
have legal implications. Sexual harassment of an adult occurs under the law when
submission to such conduct is either an explicit or implicit term or condition of
employment or any employment decision (e.g., promotion, training, timekeeping or overtime assignments, etc.); or the conduct has the purpose or effect of
substantially interfering with an individual’s work performance, or creating an
intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment.
St. Paul’s School condemns and expressly prohibits sexual contact or relationships between adults and students and sexual harassment of any kind. While the
School must comply with state and federal laws dealing with sexual harassment,
our policy also seeks to educate members of the community about the nature of
sexual harassment and to do whatever we can to prevent it from occurring.
St. Paul’s School is unequivocally committed to ensuring the safety and integrity
of student growth. We actively teach each and every member of the School community about the proper roles and relationships that compose community life. We
set forth and seek every opportunity to talk about the importance of boundaries.
We expect that the life experience of adults at the School will enrich the student’s
learning experience. We place the student’s best interests above all other considerations. All sexual advances (overt or otherwise) between adults and students
are prohibited, on or off the grounds, even if a student encourages or appears to
encourage such advances. Sexual behavior between adults and students is considered a severe breach of trust and will be dealt with as such.
Identifying Sexual Harassment
Sexual harassment can take various forms, many of which violate state or federal
laws. Not all forms of sexual harassment may be readily apparent to every member
of the community. It may be direct and overt, or it may be subtle and ambiguous.
It may be behavior that is repeated, or it may be behavior that occurs only once.
It is not social or courting behavior between equals, but rather the assertion of
power over another individual that puts that individual at a disadvantage.
Individuals might unintentionally act in a manner that others experience as sexually harassing. It is the responsibility of all members of the community to ensure
that their words, actions, and interactions with others always reflect the intent
to promote respect and trust. Attempts to justify such behavior as a “prank” or
“joke” do not change its harassing nature if the object of the joke is not a willing
participant. Whatever the basis for the harassment, it is prohibited.
101

When trying to identify whether behavior is “harassing,” it is crucial to distinguish
student-to-student interactions from sexual intimacy between students and adults,
which is always prohibited. Physical contact between students that is intended
and perceived by those involved as positive, healthy, and appropriate to their age
and experience is likely to occur. However, inappropriate physical relationships
between students are described and prohibited in the School’s written expectations of students.
When these behaviors occur between an adult and a student, it is irrelevant whether
the behavior is welcome or unwelcome. There is no circumstance in which these
behaviors between adults and students are permissible. The following behaviors
are examples of harassing behaviors. The list is suggestive rather than exhaustive,
and members of the community should seek advice and assistance in any circumstance in which they are made to feel uncomfortable by the behaviors of another.
Some examples of harassment are:
• physical assault, including rape or any coerced or non-consensual sexual
relations
• sexual advances, whether they involve physical touching or not
• sexual physical contact
• sexual or lewd jokes, remarks, leering, whistling, brushing against the body,
or other suggestive or insulting gestures or comments
• inquiries into one’s sexual experiences or activities or discussion of one’s own
sexual experiences or activities other than discussed in a confidential medical
or mental health visit
• audiotaping, videotaping, or otherwise recording others in sexual or other
potentially embarrassing circumstances and forwarding or threatening to
forward the recorded material to others
• intimidating or suggestive remarks about an individual’s sexual orientation,
whether actual or implied
• sexually suggestive or degrading sounds or remarks (written, oral, or electronically transmitted), including graffiti and the spreading of sexual rumors,
made to or about another member of the community
• the use of School technology to transmit sexually suggestive, offensive, and/
or degrading material, whether received at the School or elsewhere
• the open display of sexually offensive objects, pictures, and messages
HOSTILE ENVIRONMENT

A hostile environment is one in which discrimination, harassment, hazing, or
bullying causes the School environment to be permeated with intimidation, ridicule, or insult that is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of a
student’s education.

102

RETALIATION

Retaliation is any form of intimidation, reprisal, or harassment directed against
a student who reports discrimination, harassment, hazing, assault, or bullying,
provides information during an investigation of such behavior, or witnesses or
has reliable information about such behavior.
Retaliation against any individual for reporting violations of the policy, whether
by the object of the complaint or someone else, will not be tolerated and will be
subject to the same strict discipline as harassment, discrimination, hazing, or
bullying itself. Each retaliatory offense will be investigated and sanctioned separately. Individuals who themselves are not complainants, but who participate in
an investigation, for example, as witnesses or investigators, will also be protected
from retaliation under this policy.
LEGAL DEFINITIONS AND SCHOOL POLICY

It is important to bear in mind that stricter standards of behavior than those provided by law may apply under the policies of St. Paul’s School in order that we
may prevent inappropriate verbal and physical conduct. St. Paul’s School reserves
the right to apply disciplinary measures and other corrective action in a case of a
single expression, act, or gesture, if the School determines that it is of sufficient
severity to warrant disciplinary measures or other remedial action. Conduct need
not meet the legal definitions of harassment, discrimination, hazing, or bullying
to violate the School’s expectations for appropriate behavior and be actionable.
PREVENTION

St. Paul’s is committed to providing the healthiest possible school environment for
all members of our community. As such, the School regularly engages students,
faculty, and staff in opportunities to understand and put into practice community
standards and expectations.
Training for students, faculty, and staff that is specific to harassment, discrimination, bullying, hazing, and sexual harassment is provided at regular intervals at
developmentally appropriate levels each school year. The aim of such training is
to prevent such behaviors from occurring and to equip community members with
the understanding, skills, and support to adequately respond to such instances
should they occur.
Training occurs for groups of students and employees around particular topics.
The School may also require individuals to attend such training to improve their
understanding of the issues surrounding harassment, discrimination, bullying,
hazing, and sexual harassment and the importance of preventing such instances.
Information is always available through the Dean of Students Office, the Vice Rector for Faculty, and the Human Resources Office. In addition, the School works
closely with attorneys and healthcare professionals who can provide additional
information and training to members of the School community when needed.

103

REPORTING COMPLAINTS

St. Paul’s School will not tolerate and responds vigorously to any reported harassment, discrimination, bullying, hazing or sexual harassment of students, faculty,
staff, or family members of employees residing on the grounds by vendors, contractors, other third parties having agreements or other contacts with the School,
supporters of the School (donors, volunteers, alumni, parents), and/or visitors
to the School.
Even when students or adults are not certain about whether they have been subject
to or witnessed harassment, discrimination, hazing, or bullying, it is important that
the behavior be reported. Individuals who have been subject to such behavior often
suffer in silence, believing that they are the only one to whom this is happening
and wrongly feeling that they are somehow responsible. Inappropriate behavior
can continue over many years because individuals think they are alone, or because
they fear punishment or unwanted attention and embarrassment if they tell.
Any individual who feels that she or he has been subject to discrimination,
harassment, hazing, or bullying may consult with a member of the Community
Conduct Board (CCB; see below for a full explanation), the dean of students, or
another trusted adult.
Any member of the faculty or staff of St. Paul’s School who witnesses or otherwise
becomes aware of discrimination, harassment, hazing, or bullying in violation of
this policy or who becomes aware of retaliation against a student who provides
information concerning a violation of this policy, is required to report it immediately to the dean of students, the CCB, the vice rector for school life, or the
Director of Human Resources. Such reporting does not discharge the obligation
of the faculty or staff member to report actions covered by reporting laws to the
appropriate legal authority. A member of the faculty or staff may not make promises
of confidentiality to a student or parent who informs him/her of an allegation of
harassment, discrimination, hazing, bullying, or retaliation.
An individual who needs to report an incident of harassment, discrimination,
bullying, hazing, or sexual harassment may do so through one of three means:
• Report the incident directly to the dean of students or Clark House personnel
• Report the incident to a member of the Community Conduct Board
• Submit a report via Lighthouse Services. Lighthouse is an independent company hired by SPS to provide a means for community members to report
incidents without identifying the source of the report. Lighthouse can be
contacted by:
		
Phone: 1-800-401-8004
		
E-mail: reports@lighthouse-services.com (tell them you are at SPS)
		
Fax: 215-689-3885 (tell them you are at SPS)

104

Although there are circumstances in which an anonymous report can be better
than none at all, it is far more difficult to determine the facts of what occurred
if complaints are made anonymously. Also, while the School cannot promise
strict confidentiality because information must be shared in order to conduct an
effective investigation, the School releases information concerning complaints
of harassment, discrimination, hazing, bullying, or retaliation only on a need-toknow basis, such as to conduct a comprehensive investigation or to ensure that
the requirements of this policy and applicable law are met.
Response to Complaints
Once a report of harassment, discrimination, bullying, hazing, assault, or sexual
harassment involving students is made, the Community Conduct Board (CCB)
will typically investigate the reported incident. In some cases, the CCB may ask
the dean of students to help conduct the investigation. In other cases, the CCB
may determine that no CCB investigation is necessary, at which point the case
would be handled by the Dean of Students Office alone.

Community Conduct Board (CCB)
This CCB structure was developed to ensure that federal and state laws and relevant School policies are followed. The CCB membership will include the specific
School positions identified below. The CCB will continually review its structure
and processes and will make changes as appropriate.
SCOPE OF CCB

St. Paul’s School is responsible for providing all employees and students with a
healthy and safe learning environment. The School seeks to comply with federal
and state laws, as well as relevant School policies, to achieve, through edu- cation,
communication and mediation, a welcoming and respectful work and school
environment free of harassment, hazing, bullying, assault, discrimination, and
retaliation.
The members of the CCB for the 2017–18 school year are:
Caroline Bergeron, director of human resources (co-chair, staff)
Theresa Ferns, vice rector for school life (faculty)
Aaron Marsh ’97, dean of students (faculty)
Scott Morin, director of information technology (staff)
Michael Spencer, vice rector for faculty (co-chair, faculty)
Colin Callahan, head of the arts department, (former chair*, faculty)
*The former chair of the CCB may be asked to sit on the Community Conduct Board
to provide continuity and historic perspective.

105

HOW THE CCB OPERATES

The focus of the CCB is to take steps as a collaborative team to deal with incidents
of harassment, hazing, bullying, assault, discrimination, and retaliation in the
work and academic settings. The CCB is charged with identifying and documenting incidents, conducting investigations, taking and collecting notes, archiving
materials, and developing recommendations for handling incidents. Based on the
level and nature of an incident, this board may decide to enlist outside resources,
including the assistance of an external investigator. The CCB will meet weekly as
necessary to review its work.
It is important to bear in mind that a stricter standard of behavior than that provided
by law may apply under St. Paul’s School policies in order that we may prevent
inappropriate verbal and physical conduct. For example, although the law defines
bullying as “repeated use” of certain expressions, acts, and/or gestures, the School
reserves the right to apply disciplinary measures and other corrective action in
a case of a single expression, act, or gesture, if the School deter- mines that it is
of sufficient severity to warrant disciplinary measures or other remedial action.
Conduct need not meet the legal definitions of harassment, discrimination, hazing,
bullying, or assault to violate the School’s expectations for appropri- ate behavior.
PRIVACY

CCB members will strive to ensure privacy in the process of an investigation to
the greatest extent feasible. Only the Rector, investigating members of the CCB,
and others (e.g., legal counsel or an external investigative agency) as neces- sary,
should be privy to the details of an investigation. In
a debriefing of an incident, the names of the individuals should be disclosed only
as needed. The CCB members shall sign a statement annually that affirms their
commitment to privacy.
REPORTING INCIDENTS

Students, employees, and parents currently have multiple re- porting methods,
including taking concerns to any member of the community, as described in our
Staff, Student and Faculty handbooks. Under the CCB, students and employ- ees
will continue to have all current methods available to them and will also be able
to raise concerns with any mem- ber of the CCB.
The primary contact for incidents involving students is the dean of students. For
incidents involving faculty, the Vice Rector for Faculty is the primary contact,
and for incidents involving staff, the HR Director is the primary contact. At times,
these primary contacts may ask other CCB members for assistance in handling
and responding to incidents and investigations. If a primary contact person is
unavailable or involved in an incident in a manner that may create a potential
conflict situation, then another CCB member, as appropriate, may serve as the
primary contact (and investi- gator) in handling the incident.

106

Once a report is made to the CCB, members will determine:
• Whether the CCB will investigate the case formally or refer it to another SPS
department for an informal investigation, such as dean of students, vice rector for faculty, or director of human resources. This assessment may occur
through electronic communication using a set of predetermined criteria or
in a meeting of CCB members.
• What, if any, intermediary measures need to be in place to mitigate against
further harassment and/or retaliation during the CCB process (including
leaves of absence or administrative leave).
Any person who believes he or she has been hazed, ha- rassed, discriminated
against, assaulted, or bullied, who has witnessed such an incident, or who
otherwise has relevant information about such an incident, should bring the matter
immediately to the attention of an adviser, dean, member of the CCB, or to any
other faculty or staff member with whom the person is comfortable speaking. The
individual receiving the complaint will ensure that it reaches the proper channels
for investigation. Also, any person who is subject to retaliation in violation of
this policy or who knows of another person who has been subject to retaliation
is likewise required to promptly report it.
A parent of a student who is the target of discrimination, harassment, hazing,
or bullying, or of a student who has witnessed or otherwise has relevant information about such behaviors is strongly urged to promptly notify the Dean of
Students Office or any CCB member. Furthermore, any parent who has him- or
herself witnessed discrimination, harassment, hazing, assault, or bullying or has
relevant information concerning such an incident is strongly urged to promptly
come forward to the dean of students or the CCB. A parent also should promptly
report any incident of retaliation to the dean of students or the CCB.
Any employee of the School who witnesses or otherwise becomes aware of discrimination, harassment, hazing, bullying, or assault in violation of this policy
or who becomes aware of retaliation is required to report it immediately to the
dean of students or the CCB.
Employees may not make promises of confidentiality to a student or parent who
informs him/her of an allegation of harassment, discrimination, hazing, bul- lying, assault, or retaliation. Employees may not make reports under this policy
anonymously. Although there are circumstances in which an anonymous report
can be better than none at all, it is far more difficult to determine the facts of what
occurred if complaints are made anonymously.
Also, while the School cannot promise strict confidentiality, because information
must be shared in order to conduct an effective investigation, the School releases
information con- cerning complaints of harassment, discrimination, hazing, bullying, assault, and retaliation only on a need-to-know basis to ensure that the

107

requirements of this policy and applicable law are met. The School will report
all incidents of unlawful behvaior to appropriate law enforcement officials, as
required by law.
Investigation Process
Once contacted, either by a student or an adult representing a person, the CCB
may pursue an informal or formal pro- cess depending on the nature of the complaint. In situations for which an informal process is appropriate, the CCB may
provide advice to the complainant or the person represent- ing the complainant
as to how to respond to the situation on his/her own. Alternatively, the CCB may
obtain support for the complainant to moderate a conversation, in person or writing, between the complainant and the person perceived as the aggressor. Such
mediation may be conducted by a dean, counselor, external counsel, or other
appropriate individual.
In the event that an informal process is unsuccessful or inappropriate, the CCB
will initiate a formal investigation of the complaint. Such an investigation either
may be handled directly by members of the CCB, by an external investigator, and/
or by the Dean of Student’s Office, and by any other individuals as appropriate.
This will include but is not limited to interviews of those individuals directly
involved in the incident and any potential witnesses, and collecting documents
and any other evidence bearing on the incident. The CCB will at all times during
the process maintain privacy to the extent, in its judgment, the situation permits.
All members of the School community are expected to cooper- ate fully with any
investigation under this policy.
Upon completion of its investigation, the CCB will summarize its findings and
recommendations to the Rector. The Rector, or his/her designee, in consultation
with the CCB, will determine what, if any, school response should be initiated.
The CCB designee will inform individuals directly involved of the outcome of
the investigation and whether action has or will be taken. In addition, the CCB
designee, in conjunction with the CCB, will provide documentation as appropriate for inclusion in the records of persons found in violation of school rules or
expectations.
Although the School’s goals are to support and educate members of the community as the principal means of pre- venting harassment, discrimination, hazing,
bullying, and assault, it is both a principled goal and the legal duty of the School
to ensure a learning environment free of such behavior.
The School and the CCB thus reserve the right to act promptly, and if necessary,
unilaterally, to end harassment, discrimination, hazing, and bullying where such
interven- tion is deemed to be warranted. Individuals who have been found to
have engaged in harassment, discrimination, hazing, bullying, or assault will, in
accordance with the procedures outlined above, be subject to remedial action or
discipline as appropriate, from counseling to expulsion/termination. In addition,
108

further action may be taken for any individual’s failure to comply with the terms
of any remedial action or discipline imposed.
ABUSES OF PROCESS/FAILURE TO COOPERATE IN AN INVESTIGATION

Because allegations of discrimination, harassment, hazing, bullying, or assault are
serious and can be damaging to accused per- sons’ reputations, any person who
knowingly, maliciously, or recklessly makes a false complaint will be subject to
discipline. In addition, because candor and honesty are essential to the investigation and remediation process, they are required of all participants, including
third-party witnesses.
The withholding of material information in an investigation by complainants,
witnesses, and/or the accused party is pro- hibited. Students and employees are
expected to cooperate fully in an investigation conducted by the School; failure
to demonstrate such cooperation will lead to a school response. Abuse of the
process, including falsifying information, will result in discipline being imposed,
up to and including expulsion/termination.
RECORDS

Following disposition, all records of complaints related to students will be retained
as applicable by the dean of students, the Community Conduct Board, and/or by
the School’s attorney. These records will be accessible on a need-to-know basis only.

NH Anti-Hazing Law/Safe School Zone Reporting
ST. PAUL’S SCHOOL REPORTING EXPECTATIONS AND NEW HAMPSHIRE
MANDATED REPORTING LAWS

Given our institutional commitment to the well-being of our students and the
overall health of our community, any behavior which potentially endangers
members of our community is of serious concern. The expectation of St. Paul’s
School is that all students, faculty, and staff will address any and all behaviors
that are not in keeping with our School mission to model and teach “respect for
self and others; for one’s spiritual, physical, and emotional well-being.” Behaviors
that might qualify as harassing, discriminatory, hazing, bullying, or retaliatory
should be reported immediately to the dean of students, either directly or through
another adult on campus.
In addition to the internal reporting referenced above, there are external reporting laws designed to ensure the health and safety of children in the State of New
Hampshire. These laws require schools to monitor and report legally prohibited
conduct to outside authorities. Depending on the behavior in question, the reports
are made to the Department of Children, Youth and Family Services (DCYF),
the police, or both. Generally speaking, the dean of students makes the reports
on behalf of St. Paul’s School, but a broad spectrum of individuals are deemed
“mandatory reporters” under the various laws, including the School physician,
nurses, and counselors.
109

There are three reporting laws that most frequently affect St. Paul’s School. These
laws relate to:
1) child abuse;
2) hazing; and
3) criminal acts in a safe school zone (including illegal possession or sale of a
controlled drug and non-consensual sex).
A review of these laws reveals that they share some common elements, but that
there are also differences between them. In all potentially reportable cases, St.
Paul’s School carefully reviews the circumstances to ensure that our students are
well cared for and that we are meeting the mandate of the law. What follows is a
brief explication of these three key reporting laws and their applicability to the
specific context of St. Paul’s School. Please note that the following is a summary
of the laws and not a legal analysis.
CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT REPORTS

In the case of suspected or actual child abuse, “all persons” who have “reason to
suspect” that a child has been abused or neglected are mandated to immediately
report that knowledge. At St. Paul’s, community members who have knowledge of
or suspect such abuse are required to report this information to either the dean of
students, the School physician, or a Clark House counselor. The dean of students
or Clark House will make the report to the Department of Children, Youth, and
Family Services. Failure to report is a misdemeanor.
HAZING REPORTS

In the case of hazing or potential hazing, students who have knowingly submitted
to hazing, been present at, or who have direct knowledge of hazing are mandated
to report that information. Similarly, as a member of an educational organization,
any adult member of the St. Paul’s community must also report any knowledge of
hazing or suspected hazing. Officers and members in any student organization,
team, or group are also responsible for making sure that hazing does not happen.
At St. Paul’s, these reports should be made to the dean of students, who will make
the report to the Concord Police Department. Failure to report is a misdemeanor.
SAFE SCHOOL ZONE REPORTS

Under the terms of the Safe School Zone laws, the School is required to report a
number of legally prohibited behaviors. Any School employee who has witnessed
or who has information from the victim of an act of theft, destruction, or violence
in a safe school zone must report it in writing immediately to their supervisor. A
supervisor must then report the incident to the dean of students or the Rector,
who is required by law to immediately report it to the local police. In addition, if
the alleged victim is a student, the dean of students or Rector must immediately
notify the person responsible for the victim’s welfare that a report was made to
the local law enforcement authority. In some cases, a report to the Department of
110

Children, Youth, and Family Services is also required. A “safe school zone” is an
area inclusive of any school property or school buses.
The definition of an “act of theft, destruction or violence” is broad and includes:
• Homicide
• First or second degree assault
• Felonious or aggravated sexual assault
• Criminal mischief
• Unlawful possession or sale of a firearm or other dangerous weapon
• Arson
• Burglary
• Robbery
• Theft (any theft in excess of $300 will be reported to the police)
• Illegal possession or sale of a controlled drug
Knowing failure to report as required under the Safe School Zone Law is a violation.
Under the terms of the law, when the School makes a report, we must provide
the date and time of the incident, name(s) of individual(s) involved, names and
addresses of witnesses, and actions taken by the School. At St. Paul’s School, these
reports are normally made by the dean of students, but also can be made by Clark
House personnel or the Director of the Safety Department.
Once the report is made, the Concord Police Department’s response will depend
upon a number of factors, including but not limited to the age of the student(s)
involved and the nature of the specific crime.
Illegal Possession or Sale of a Controlled Drug
Students 16 or younger who are found to be in illegal possession of or involved
in the sale of a controlled drug should expect to be petitioned to Juvenile Court.
If you are found to be in possession of or involved in the sale of a controlled drug
and you are 17 or older, you are considered an adult, and should therefore expect
to face arrest and prosecution in the criminal courts.
Students should also be aware that if, in the context of a non-disciplinary response
to drug use (i.e., Sanctuary), the School comes into possession of a controlled
drug, the School is required to make a report to the police. The student(s) involved
would not face internal disciplinary consequences but could face external legal
consequences.
New Hampshire Statutory Rape Laws
When a child under the age of 16 is involved in voluntary and welcome sexual
relations, we do not refer to the activity as “consensual” because in New Hampshire children under the age of 16 cannot legally consent to sexual relations. In
111

those circumstances, the conduct is often referred to as “statutory rape,” a colloquial term for the laws that treat such activity as criminal. The statutory term
is “sexual assault.”
In New Hampshire, there are different degrees of criminal responsibility for socalled “statutory rape.” It should be noted that any sexual activity with a child
under the age of 13 is a felony.
This summary focuses on voluntary and welcome sexual activity with a child age
13–15. (Sexual activity which is forced, coerced, or involves incapacity is a felony
and is not considered “statutory rape”.) The level of criminal responsibility and
corresponding penalties vary depending on the age differential between the parties
involved and the type of activity. (The age differentials are sometimes referred to
as “Romeo and Juliet” provisions.)
“Sexual Contact” With a Child Age 13–15
“Sexual contact’’ means the intentional touching whether directly, through clothing,
or otherwise, of the victim’s or actor’s sexual or intimate parts, for the purpose of
sexual arousal or gratification.
Age differential:
• If less than 5 years, sexual contact is not criminal.
• If 5 years or more, sexual contact is a misdemeanor.
“Sexual Penetration” with a child age 13–15
“Sexual penetration” means sexual intercourse, oral or anal sex, or any other act
of sexual intrusion.
Age differential:
• If less than 4 years, sexual penetration is a misdemeanor.
• If 4 years or more, sexual penetration is a felony
SUMMARY OF KEY REPORTING STATUTES IN NEW HAMPSHIRE

This “Summary of the Key Reporting Statutes” outlines who the mandated reporters are for each law, what triggers a report, the terms of “discharging the duty” to
report, the terms of protections for those making the reports, and the penalty for
failing to comply with the law.
Child Abuse Reports (RSA 169-C:29)
• Mandated Reporters: Any person.
• Reporting Trigger: “Reason to suspect” that child has been abused or neglected.
• Discharging the Duty: Report orally “immediately” to the Department of
Children and Youth Services (DCYF); followed by a written report within 48
hours, if requested.

112

• Protection for Reporting: “Good faith” reports are “immune from any liability,
civil or criminal.”
• Penalty for Non-Compliance: Failing to report is a misdemeanor.
Hazing Reports (RSA 631:7)
• Mandated Reporters: Public or private high school or college students, others,
any public or private high school or college, or any related organization.
• Reporting Triggers: For students, knowingly submitting to hazing. For students or others, being present at, or having “direct knowledge” of, hazing.
For an educational or related organization, having “knowledge” of hazing.
• Discharging the Duty: Students and others must report to law enforcement
or educational institution authorities. Educational institution or related organizations must report to law enforcement authorities.
• Protection for Reporting: None.
• Penalty for Non-Compliance: Failing to report is a misdemeanor.
Safe School Zone Reports (RSA 193-D:4)
• Mandated Reporters: Any public or private elementary or secondary “school
employee.”
• Reporting Triggers: Witnessing a listed crime of theft, destruction or violence
in a safe school zone, or having information from a victim of a listed crime
in a safe school zone.
• Discharging the Duty: The employee must provide a written report “immediately” to a supervisor. The supervisor must “immediately” forward the
information to the “school principal” who must “immediately” notify the
local police verbally and in writing within 48 hours. If the alleged victim is
a student, the principal must also “immediately” notify the student’s parents
of the report.
• Protection for Reporting: Good faith reports are “not…subject to liability.”
• Penalty for Non-Compliance: Failure to report is a violation.
Illegal Sale or Possession of a Controlled Drug (RSA 318-B)
(Safe School Zone Report)
• Mandated Reporters: Any public or private elementary or secondary “school
employee.”
• Reporting Triggers: Witnessing or having information about the possession
or sale of an illegal controlled drug in a safe school zone
• Protection for Reporting: Good faith reports are “not…subject to liability.”
• Penalty for Non-Compliance: Failure to report is a violation

113

Felony Non-Consensual Sex (RSA 632-A)
(Safe School Zone Report)
• Mandated Reporters: Any public or private elementary or secondary “school
employee.”
• Reporting Triggers: Witnessing or having information from a victim of felonious sexual assault (RSA 632-A:3) or aggravated felonious sexual assault (RSA
632-A:2) in a safe school zone. Under circumstances as defined in RSA 632-A
and as noted above, sexual penetration with someone 13 to 15 years old is
criminal and is subject to prosecution in the discretion of the police and will
be reported by the school when required under the law. In addition, some
forms of sexual contact with someone 13 to 15 may be criminal depending
on the circumstances and the age differential between the actor and the other
person involved, and may be subject to prosecution in the discretion of the
police and will be reported by the school when required under the law. The
school will also report such conduct to DCYF under the child protection act
as required.
• Protection for Reporting: Good faith reports are “not…subject to liability.”
• Penalty for Non-Compliance: Failure to report is a violation.

Appropriate Use of Technology
Computers, mobile phones, digital cameras, and other technologies are now
widely available, and the School supports their appropriate use. In the context of
a school, however, students must use these devices cautiously so as not to affect
negatively the educational mission of the school, a student’s academic development, or the rights of other members of the community. The detailed Acceptable
Use Policy, found below, should be read carefully. By way of preface, we ask that
you also keep a few basic guidelines in mind.
1. Mobile phones should always be off during classes, concerts, and lectures, as
well as in Chapel or any venue where a ringing phone may cause disruption.
Students using phones (of all types) in the dormitory should take care not
to disturb other students’ quiet study.
2. Limiting time on the Internet, including on social networking sites, has become an essential skill for academic success. Internet access is primarily for
academic purposes, and excessive abuse of this not only violates the school’s
Acceptable Use Policy, but also can interfere with academic work, healthy
sleep patterns, and one’s ability to meet certain expectations of respectful
interaction with other community members. Even with academic work, there
is reason for caution on the Internet; plagiarism and other inappropriate
behavior (including getting too much research and editing help from family
members and friends) can happen more easily electronically. Make sure you
have clearly documented all outside sources and helpers on all academic work.

114

3. The School reserves the right to require students to remove from their rooms
or from dormitory commons areas, any technology that the head of house
feels detracts from the academic or social atmosphere of the dormitory. Each
student is allowed, at most, one computer monitor (not to exceed 27” inches).
4. Finally, make sure to secure proper consent for all subjects of photographs
or videos. Texts, voice-mails, photos, and videos can become public, and
therefore you should always be fully prepared to take full responsibility for
their content.
ACCEPTABLE USE OF TECHNOLOGY POLICY

St. Paul’s School is pleased to be able to provide a wide assortment of some of the
latest technology resources available. These technology resources are provided as
one of the privileges of being a member of the St. Paul’s School community and are
intended to enhance your life and work here. As with any privilege, it is expected
that you will use these resources with care, concern, and respect. Violation of these
policies may result in discipline, up to and including expulsion.
OVERVIEW

Access to information technologies is integral to the educational mission and
purpose of our institution. We use technology in nearly every facet of instruction, activity, service, research, and operation of our School. This policy provides
expectations for the use of technology as it affects our School and educational
community.
Due to the evolutionary nature of technology, it is imperative for students to
realize that our policies regarding the use of technology in our community will
also be evolutionary. We ask all students to employ their best judgment when it
comes to the use of School technology and keep in mind that our policies related
to technology are not meant to supersede our other School policies, but rather to
complement them. Although our School provides certain technologies, we recognize that members and guests of our community also have their own technology
devices that they bring to our campus and School events. Our policies address the
appropriate use of both technologies provided by the School and personally owned
technological devices. Please read the policies below before using our network
and computers, because by using our technology, you agree to be bound by the
terms, conditions and regulations below.
SUPERVISION AND PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY

All students must sign an agreement before they can use any School technologies.
This agreement needs to be signed one time only unless the form is updated in
a subsequent year.
The use of School and personally owned technology on School property or at
School events is a privilege, not a right. This privilege comes with personal responsibilities and if you violate the responsible use of any School technologies,
your privilege may be revoked and/or suspended.
115

Our School provides sufficient information technology resources for each student
for regular academic pursuits. If a particular research project requires additional
resources, the Information Technology Department works with students on a
case-by-case basis to provide additional resources.
PRIVACY

St. Paul’s School reserves the right to monitor and track all behaviors and interactions that take place online or through the use of technology on our property or
at our events. We also reserve the right to investigate any reports of inappropriate
actions related to any technology used at School.
All e-mails and messages sent through the School’s network or accessed on a School
computer may be inspected. Any files saved onto a School computer may also be
inspected. Students have a limited expectation of privacy when using their own
technology on School property or at School events as long as no activity violates
policy, law, and/or compromises the safety and well-being of the School community.
RIGHT TO UPDATE

Since technology is continually evolving, St. Paul’s School reserves the right to
change, update, and edit its technology policies at any time in order to continually
protect the safety and well-being of our students and community. To this end, the
School may add additional rules, restrictions, and guidelines at any time.
TERMINATION OF ACCOUNTS AND ACCESS

After graduation or upon other termination of your official status as a student at
our institution, you will no longer have access to the School network, files stored
on the School network, or your School-provided e-mail account. Prior to graduation, we recommend saving all personal data stored on School technology to a
removable hard drive and set up an alternative e-mail account. If you leave our
institution in good standing, we will provide you with e-mail access for a period
of six months after your graduation date.
USER ORIENTATION

All incoming students must attend an orientation session about acceptable and
unacceptable behaviors related to technology. This course is required before a
student may use any School technologies.
PURPOSES AND USE EXPECTATIONS FOR TECHNOLOGY

Students may use School technologies for some recreational uses, keeping in mind
that School technology resources are both shared and finite. These resources include, but are not limited to, disk space, bandwidth, CPU time and effort, printers,
faxes, software, and workstations.
If your recreational use interferes with another’s educational use, you will be
asked to refrain from your activity or engage in your activity in a specified time.

116

PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY

We expect our students to act responsibly and thoughtfully when it comes to
using technology. Technology is a finite, shared resource offered by the School
to its students. Students bear the burden of responsibility to inquire with the IT
Department or a School administrator when they are unsure of the permissibility
of a particular use of technology prior to engaging in the use.
INTERNET USAGE

Do not access material that is offensive, profane, or obscene including pornography
and hate literature. Hate literature is anything written with the intention to degrade,
intimidate, incite violence, or incite prejudicial action against an individual or a
group based on race, ethnicity, nationality, gender, gender identity, age, religion,
sexual orientation, disability, language, political views, socioeconomic class, occupation, or appearance (such as height, weight, and hair color).
NETWORK STORAGE AND ACCOUNTS

Network storage is a finite School resource. We expect students to be respectful
of other users and limit the amount of space and memory taken up on School
computers and on the School network. Each student has 2 GB of storage space
to save files on our network.
All students are provided with a School e-mail address. All e-mails sent from this
account are representative of St. Paul’s School and are subject to School policies
regarding appropriate language use, bullying, stalking, and other related School
policies. Each student is provided with 1 GB of storage space.
St. Paul’s School provides individual technology accounts for students to keep
track of their technology use. Users must log off when they are finished using a
School computer. Failing to log off may allow others to use your account, and
students are responsible for any activity that occurs through their personal account.
CELL PHONES AND SMARTPHONES

In an effort to protect the special nature of our fully residential community we
restrict cell phone use on our campus. We recognize that students and families
rely on cell phones for regular communication and for this reason we ask that
students abide by these guidelines:
• No cell phone usage while walking on the paths
• Should a student need to call or text, students should find a place to sit.
• No headphones on the paths (not limited to cell phones/smartphones)
• No phone usage in the Upper Dining Halls and Common Room
• No active phone conversations inside academic buildings
During evening hours (7 p.m. to 6 a.m.), these guidelines will not be in effect with
the exception of the library, where there should be no active phone conversations
at any time.
117

In order to ensure access to their advisers, students are encouraged to take cell
phones with them whenever they leave the grounds of St. Paul’s School.
COMMUNICATION

Inappropriate communication is prohibited for students in any public messages,
in private messages, with cell phones or Smartphones, and material posted online. Inappropriate communication includes, but is not limited to, the following:
obscene, profane, lewd, vulgar, rude, inflammatory, threatening, or disrespectful
language or images typed, posted, or spoken by students; information that could
cause damage to an individual or the School community or create the danger of
disruption of the academic environment; personal attacks, including prejudicial or
discriminatory attacks; harassment (persistently acting in a manner that distresses
or annoys another person) or stalking of others; knowingly or recklessly posting
false or defamatory information about a person or organization; and communication that promotes the destruction of property, including the acquisition or creation
of weapons or other destructive devices. If you are told by another person to stop
sending communications, you must stop.
CYBER-BULLYING

Students may not use any technology to harass, demean, humiliate, intimidate,
embarrass, or annoy their classmates or others in their community. This is unacceptable student behavior known as cyber-bullying and will not be tolerated. Any
cyber-bullying, on- or off-campus, that is determined to substantially disrupt the
safety and/or well-being of the School is subject to disciplinary action.
SPAMMING

Do not post or send chain letters or spam. Spam is an unnecessary and unsolicited
message to a large group of people. Spamming can occur through e-mails, instant
messages, or text messages.
PERSONAL INTEGRITY

Do not pretend to be someone else online or use someone else’s identity without
express permission from that person and/or his/her parent/guardian if he/she is
a minor. Do not use, post, or make accessible to others the intellectual property
of someone other than yourself, including, but not limited to, text, photographs,
and video. This includes intellectual property that you were given permission to
use personally, but not publically. This behavior violates School policy as well as
state and federal laws.
COPYRIGHT AND FAIR USE

A work or item is copyrighted when, among other issues, one person or one group
owns the exclusive right to reproduce the work or item. Songs, videos, pictures,
images, and documents can all be copyrighted. Copyright infringement is when

118

you violate copyright law and use or reproduce something without the authority
to do so. Be sure to appropriately cite all materials used in your work. Do not use
someone else’s work without proper permission and bear in mind that appropriately citing material is not a substitute for permission to use another’s work(s).
DOWNLOADS AND FILE SHARING

Students may never download, add, or install new programs, software, or hardware onto School-owned computers. Downloading sound and video files onto
School-owned computers is also prohibited. This prohibition applies even if the
download is saved to a removable hard drive.
Students may never configure a School computer or personally owned computer
to engage in illegal file sharing. St. Paul’s School will cooperate fully with the appropriate authorities should illegal behavior be conducted by students.
COMMERCIAL AND POLITICAL USE

Commercial use of School technology is prohibited. Students may not use School
technology to sell, purchase, or barter any products or services. Stu- dents may
not resell their network resources to others, included, but not limited to, disk
storage space. St. Paul’s School is not responsible for any damages, injuries, and/or
claims resulting from violations of responsible use of technology. Students who are
engaged in fundraising campaigns for School-sponsored events and causes must
seek permission from the dean of students before using technology resources to
solicit funds for their event.
RESPECT FOR THE PRIVACY OF OTHERS AND PERSONAL SAFETY

Our School is a community, and community members must respect the privacy of
others. Do not intentionally seek information about, obtain copies of, or modify
files, other data, or passwords belonging to others. Do not misrepresent or assume
the identity of others. Do not re-post information that was sent to you privately
without the permission of the person who sent you the information. Do not post
private information about another person. Do not use another person’s account.
If you have been given an account with special privileges, do not use that account
outside the terms with which you were given access to that account.
Do not voluntarily post private information about yourself online, including your
name, your age, your School name, your address, your phone number, or other
identifying information.
COMPUTER SETTINGS AND COMPUTER LABS

Students are allowed to alter, change, modify, repair, or reconfigure settings on
School-owned computers only with the express prior permission of the Information
Technology Department. This includes deleting cookies and history and re-setting
the time and/or date on the computer.
Purposefully spreading or facilitating the spread of a computer virus or other
harmful computer program is prohibited.
119

Students may not circumvent any system security measures. The use of websites
to tunnel around firewalls and filtering software is expressly prohibited. The use
of websites to anonymize the user is also prohibited. The use of websites, both
domestic and international, to circumvent any School policy is prohibited. Students
may not alter the settings on a computer in such a way that the virus protection
software would be disabled. Students are not to try to guess passwords. Students
are not to access any secured files, resources, or administrative areas of the School
network without express permission or the proper authority.
No policy can detail all possible examples of unacceptable behavior related to
technology use. Our School technology users are expected to understand that
the same rules, guidelines, and policies that apply to non-technology-related
student behavior also apply to technology-related student behavior. Our School
technology users are expected to use their best judgment when it comes to making
decisions related to the use of all technology and the Internet. If there is ever an
issue regarding technology about which you are unsure, ask someone in the Dean
of Students Office, a member of the IT Department, the director of the Language
Center, or library staff for direction and assistance.
LIABILITY

The School cannot and does not guarantee that the functions and services provided
by and through our technology will be problem-free. The School is not responsible
for any damages students may suffer, including but not limited to, loss of data
or interruptions of service. The School is not responsible for the accuracy or the
quality of the information obtained through School technologies. Although the
School does filter some content obtained through School technologies, the School
is not responsible for student’s exposure to “unacceptable” information nor is the
School responsible for misinformation. The School is not responsible for financial
obligations arising through the use of School technologies.
There are risks involved with using the Internet. To protect personal safety, Internet users should not give out personal information to others via e-mail, social
networking sites, bulletin boards, or other systems. The School cannot guarantee
that users will not encounter text, pictures, or references that are objectionable.
Responsible attitudes and appropriate behavior are essential in using this resource.
As with e-mail, information that a user places on the Internet is akin to sending a
postcard rather than a sealed letter. Its contents can last indefinitely and may be
accessed by system administrators on this campus and elsewhere.
• Users must be aware that some material circulating on the Internet is copyrighted and subject to all copyright laws. Materials taken from the Internet
must be properly footnoted.
• Users must be aware that some material circulating on the Internet is illegally
distributed. Users must never use the School’s system to download illegally
distributed material.

120

• Users are cautioned not to open e-mail attachments or download any files
from unknown sources, in order to avoid damaging their computers and
bringing destructive viruses into the School’s system.
POLICY ENFORCEMENT AND SANCTIONS

All members of the community are expected to assist in the enforcement of this
policy. Persons in violation of this policy are subject to a full range of sanctions,
including, but not limited to, the loss of computer, telephone, or network access
privileges, disciplinary action, and dismissal/termination from the School. Some
violations may constitute criminal offenses as defined by local, state, and federal
laws, and the School may initiate or assist in the prosecution of any such violations to the full extent of the law.
• Any suspected violation of this policy should be reported immediately to the
director of Information Technology, as well as to the dean of students (if the
suspected violator is a student), the vice rector for faculty (if the suspected
violator is a faculty member), or the director of human resources (if the suspected violator is an administrator or staff member).
SAFETY AND SECURITY TIPS FOR THE USE OF TECHNOLOGY

Posting Online and Social Networking
Never post personal information about yourself online. Personal information
includes your phone number, address, full name, siblings’ names, and parents’
names. When creating an account on a social networking website, make sure to
set your privacy settings so only your friends can view your pictures and your
profile. Avoid accepting a friend you do not already know. If possible, set up your
account so that you are notified of any postings onto your wall or page. Additionally,
whenever possible, set up your account so that you have to approve all postings
to your wall or page. Finally, if possible, set up your account to notify you when
someone else has posted and tagged you in a picture. If you have a public profile,
be careful about posting anything identifiable such as a sports team number or
local park where you spend your free time.
Communications
Think before you send all forms of communication, including e-mails, IM’s, and
text messages. Once you send the data it is not retrievable, and those who receive
it may make it public or send it along to others, despite your intentions.
Strangers
Do not feel bad about ignoring instant messages or e-mails from unknown people.
Save all contacts from known or unknown people who are repeatedly contacting
or harassing you. These saved messages will help authorities track, locate, and
prosecute cyber-stalkers and cyber-bullies.

121

Passwords
Do not share your passwords with your friends. When creating a password, do
not make it anything obvious, such as your pet’s name or favorite sports team.
Also remember to include both letters and numbers in your password if possible.
Downloads and Attachments
Do not open or run files on your computer from unknown or suspect senders
and sources. Many viruses and other undesirable consequences can result from
opening these items.
Stay Current
Do protect your own computer and devices by keeping antivirus and anti-spyware
up to date. Keep your operating system and application software up to date. Turn
off file sharing as an option on your computer.

Appropriate Use: School Publications, WSPS
and Public Spaces
Publications and other media produced by School groups and individuals (including but not limited to the Directory, the Pelican, the Yearbook and the Horae Scholastica) should be considered official School documents, and as such, are required
to conform to our community standards. Students should remember that when
they create content for a School publication, they are acting as representatives of
the School and their behavior should be in accordance with all major school rules
and expectations. Content, including text and images, must be safe, respectful,
and responsible. Content that is demeaning, humiliating and/or intimidating is
expressly forbidden, as is the use of School documents to impersonate, harass,
intimidate or discriminate against any person or group. School publications should
never be used for personal gain, financial or otherwise.
WSPS reaches far beyond Millville and it is the obligation of student broadcasters
to ensure that all content meets our community standards. Everything emanating
from the station, including recordings and live commentary, must be appropriate for all audiences. The broadcast of explicit or obscene lyrics and language is
expressly forbidden. Students must follow all applicable laws, rules, regulations,
policies, and procedures that govern the use of the public airwaves, and the failure
to comply will be considered a violation of the School’s rules and expectations.
Students may be granted key card access to otherwise locked spaces on campus
for the purpose of participating in extracurricular groups. Such spaces include
the Publication Room, Film Lab, Music Practice Rooms, Rock Band Room, and
WSPS Studio, among others. Students wishing to gain access to these spaces must
meet the following criteria: student is a recognized member of the extracurricular
group and has secured permission to access the locked space from the group’s
faculty adviser. The student should then complete a Space Usage Agreement form
122

and review expectations with a member of the Dean of Students Office. Students
should remember that use of these spaces is a privilege and a student’s access will
be terminated if that student violates the Usage Agreement.
FILMS AND LYRICS

It is the policy of our School that students may watch all films rated G (general
audience), PG (parental guidance), PG-13, or any films projected by the School
in large group settings. All R-rated films shown in larger settings (Memorial Hall,
Hargate, etc.) must be approved by the dean of students. All R-rated films shown
in smaller venues, such as classrooms, team buses, house common rooms, etc.
must be approved by the supervising adult.
Similarly, music that is played in public venues by individuals should not include
songs with explicit or offensive lyrics. Officially sanctioned school events that
involve music (i.e., school dances, coffee houses, etc.) should also not include
songs with explicit or offensive lyrics. Music played in the context of an academic
class is under the purview of the supervising adult. Questions regarding this policy
should be directed to the dean of students.

Responses to Violations
The focus of our disciplinary system is both educating students and reinforcing
our community values: we believe people can learn from their mistakes and remain contributing, positive members of the community. A serious rule violation,
therefore, often leads to a response in which the student is asked to demonstrate
both the willingness and ability to learn and mature from the experience and to
repair harm done. Typically, a second violation of a major school rule will result
in separation from the school.
There are, however, certain offenses for which a student should expect to be
dismissed from the School regardless of any prior disciplinary record. These
include any egregious offense deemed exceptionally misguided or dangerous.
Examples include serious instances of hazing, harassment, or bullying, major
theft, possession of school keys, facilitation of games of sexual solicitation and/
or conquest, multiple offenses occurring in close proximity of time to each other,
or distribution of alcohol or drugs that result in harm or risk of harm to self or
others. In addition, separation from the School is a possible outcome, even after
a first offense, when a student is selling or providing alcohol, nicotine, or illegal
or prescription drugs (including drugs used to treat ADD and ADHD), or is in
possession of paraphernalia associated with provision of alcohol, nicotine, illegal,
or prescription drugs. Lying to a Discipline Committee will also likely lead to a
separation from the school.
In order to clarify the community expectations, we have included in the section
titled Major School Expectations a minimum list of major offenses that all students
have a responsibility to review and remember. Committing any major offense out123

lined in the handbook usually results in a meeting with the Discipline Committee,
followed by a formal disciplinary response, regardless of whether a student is on
campus or school is in session. Ultimately, the Rector will determine how to process
decisions regarding discipline. Normally, he will choose to use the counsel of the
Discipline Committee before making his decision on violations of Major School
Rules but there may be occasions when he chooses to make decisions without
the use of the Discipline Committee. The Rector, in his authority, will decide on
the dispensation of discipline for students who break these Major School Rules.

Violations of Expectations and Policies
Clearly articulated School rules, standards and expectations ensure healthy relationships, civility, and stability in our community. The discipline system at St.
Paul’s School delineates and reinforces behaviors informed by the shared values
of the community, providing for consequences when behavior is out of alignment
with those values. The system honors responsibility, accountability, and honest
communication, thereby both promoting personal growth and reinforcing a positive community culture.
DISCIPLINE COMMITTEE

The Discipline Committee (DC) serves as an advisory committee with representatives from the community that gathers information, hears testimony, and makes a
recommendation to the Rector. The Rector is not bound by the Discipline Committee’s recommendation. Prior to the beginning of a Discipline Committee meeting,
the student has been determined to have violated a Major School Expectation or
Rule whether through admission or preponderance of evidence. Guilt is established
before a meeting has been convened, thus the aim of a DC meeting is to recommend
responses appropriate for the student’s particular violation that are reasonably
consistent with past responses, however the context for each individual response
is considered. The DC recommendation is mindful of the community – its safety,
its education, and its rules, norms, standards, and expectations.
The final disciplinary decision rests with the Rector, who has the authority to
impose such disciplinary action as is warranted. The Rector, at his sole discretion,
may suspend, dismiss, or expel a student if he believes it to be in the best interests
of the student or the School.
WHO IS ON THE DISCIPLINE COMMITTEE?

The Discipline Committee (DC) is composed of two parts:
• A standing committee composed of eight faculty members and a chair appointed by the Rector, and the four Student Council officers elected by the
Sixth Form
• Ad hoc members for a particular meeting of the DC. These three members
are the student, the student’s adviser, and the Student Council representative
from the student’s house (at times, a prefect has served in this role).
124

HOW IS A DISCIPLINE COMMITTEE CONVENED?

A DC meeting is convened by the chair of the Discipline Committee following
notification of a violation. Each meeting of the DC is run by the chair of the committee and includes the following participants:
• Two faculty members from the Standing Committee; generally, one female
and one male are selected by the chair, based on individual availability and
equitable rotation
• Two Student Council officers, determined by their own consultation
• The ad hoc members of the committee listed above
• An advocate of the student’s choosing (either another student or a faculty
member)
• The dean of students (or an associate dean)
WHAT HAPPENS DURING A DISCIPLINE COMMITTEE HEARING?

Confidentiality Agreement
The DC meeting begins with the reading of a statement explicitly defining the
need and expectation for confidentiality and honesty. After the statement is read,
all attending the meeting are asked to sign the statement, acknowledging that they
will keep the contents of the meeting confidential unless disclosure is required by
law and that they will be honest in their discussion during the meeting.
Statement of Involvement
All in attendance are given a copy of a statement written by the student. In this
statement, written as soon after the incident as possible, the student acknowledges
and describes the actions that have resulted in this meeting. The student also may
write about the circumstances leading to the particular offense. All in attendance
are given a statement by the adult who confronted the particular situation. This
statement may be helpful in corroborating the student’s description of the event(s)
and also helps the student to reflect on his/her actions.
The student is asked to answer the following questions:
1. What happened?
2. What have you been thinking about since it happened?
3. Who was impacted? How?
4. What do you think needs to happen to make things right?
Questions and Responses
Once the statements are read, any member of the DC may ask specific questions
of the student about the situation. All present – the student, the adviser, the advocate, and the house representative – are welcomed and invited to speak. Any
person may ask questions, offer clarification, or make comments. They also may
choose to remain silent.

125

DC Deliberations
Following the discussion, the student and the advocate are dismissed.
The DC and the remaining ad hoc members discuss possible recommendations to
the Rector. If there are known precedents, they are considered. Each case, however, is considered individually. At the conclusion of this discussion, there often
is unanimous agreement; at other times, significant disagreement remains. There
is never a vote. All recommendations, whether from one or from all, are reported
to the Rector. All members understand the need to keep the conversations and the
resultant recommendations confidential to protect the student and the committee
members. After the deliberations, the students in the room will leave while the
adults discuss recommendations for On Probation or Discipline Warning.
The recommendations are conveyed to the Rector by the chair of the DC and by
the dean of students/associate dean of students. Pertinent information about the
student, or circumstances that are confidential and could not be shared with the
DC, also are conveyed to the Rector. The Rector determines the School’s response
to the student. The Rector’s decision is final.
COMMUNICATION AROUND A DISCIPLINE COMMITTEE HEARING

Effective communication around a discipline committee hearing is important
for both the individual student and the broader community. Adults and student
leaders need to be aware of a situation to help support a student as they navigate
the discipline process. Discipline is not a private matter in our community and
students are expected to take ownership for their actions by communicating directly to the communities most impacted. Additionally, the community needs to
have an awareness of both the discipline incidents that have occurred and their
respective responses to help reinforce community values and expectations.
Before a Discipline Committee Hearing
• The student and parents will be informed that the have been deemed to have
violated major school rules and will be going to the Discipline Committee.
• Faculty will be e-mailed with the student’s name, timing of DC and which
policy violation lead to the DC.
• Student Council Officers and the house representative will be made aware of
the situation to prepare for the hearing.
After a Discipline Committee Hearing
• Faculty will learn the discipline consequences for the student in the subsequent faculty meeting. On an annual basis, faculty should be reminded of how
to support students before and after a DC in the context of their relationship.
• In the first few days following a DC, the student and their adviser will work
on a communication plan to address the following as soon as reasonably
possible, but within the first week post-DC:

126

• Communication to student’s house and any other impacted communities
(teams, clubs, music/theater groups, Pelican or any group affected by the
incident or impacted by the response (OB).
• The minimum level of information communicated to each group will be
which policy the student violated and the resulting consequences. However,
the student may choose to share more.
• The student and adviser will work on the communication together, and
the student will have an active role in the communication. The adviser will
consider both a developmental lens and the cultural context in supporting
the student and helping facilitate the conversations. Younger students may
require more scaffolding in these challenging conversations.
• In a case of a Suspension, the adviser will inform the minimum communication to the house immediately afterwards. The student will be responsible
for communication as part of rejoining the community after the separation.
• In a case of Dismissal/Expulsion, the adviser will communicate the minimum
communication to the house as soon as possible afterwards.
• The DOS will communicate with prefects, sixth form officers, and LINC
leaders in their weekly meetings.
• At the end of each term, the DOS will make a chapel announcement summarizing the DCs for the term and the subsequent responses without student
names.
Clarification of Specific Roles in the Discipline System
Advocate: The student is allowed to bring one advocate to the DC meeting; this
advocate may be a student or a faculty member. The advocate is not a defense
attorney but simply a person who is there to support the student. As with any
other person who attends the meeting, the advocate may ask questions, seek
clarification, or speak on the student’s behalf. The advocate’s presence as a supportive friend may be the most important function. It is, of course, expected that
the advocate will be honest.
Adviser: The adviser often will provide a fuller context for the student’s actions and
of the way in which the School and the adviser already have attempted to address
any underlying problems that have previously occurred. The adviser will speak
according to his or her own wishes and will make a recommendation regarding
the individual student.
House Representative: Although house representatives seldom attend more than
a few Disciplinary Committee meetings, they have a higher likelihood of knowing
the student more intimately and tend to feel more pressure to aid in the student’s
defense. Although experience has shown that students not involved with the meeting often approach this person for information about the proceedings, the house
representative must maintain the confidentiality of the proceedings. The house
representative will make a recommendation regarding the individual student.
127

Dean of students (or associate dean): The dean of students does not make a recommendation to the Rector in the context of the DC and in general attends only
as a silent observer, both while the student is present and in the discussions after
the student and advocate leave. The dean of students or associate dean assures
all concerned that there is someone aware of all that happens prior to, during,
and after a DC, as well as of any confidential information that may be pertinent.
This is particularly important in dealing with parents and in providing the best
possible follow-up and support following a DC.
Chair, Student Council Officers, and the Faculty Members of the Committee:
These members of the committee are present to ask questions, to comment on
the particular situation, and to formulate their recommendations for the Rector’s
response to the individual student.
DISCIPLINE COMMITTEE RESPONSES

The Discipline Committee may recommend any of the following:
On Restrictions
The student loses privileges for a period of time:
• The student meets with the dean of students.
• The student loses weekend privileges for the period of On Restrictions and
is restricted to the School grounds, except for a meal in town with parents
(without student guests) or a School-sponsored activity.
• The student must report to the adviser on duty and be restricted to his or her
room from 8:30 p.m. to 10 p.m. with no visitors.
• On Saturday, the student must report directly to the adviser on duty in his or
her house by 9 p.m. and remain in the house.
• Any student On Restrictions may be placed On Bounds if conduct or attitude
is unsatisfactory.
DC On Bounds
• Required to check-in at 7:30 p.m. each School night and 9 p.m. on Saturday
night.
• Restricted to his or her room without visitors from 7:30 p.m. each week-night
until breakfast the next morning.
• Loses weekend privileges for the period of On Bounds and is restricted to
the School grounds, except for a meal in town with parents (without student
guests) or a School-sponsored activity.
• On Saturday, the student must report directly to the adviser on duty in his or
her house by 9 p.m. and remain in the house. The student may move freely
about the house after the 9 p.m. check-in on Saturday nights, but may not
host guests.

128

• The student may participate in club sports and may practice with a team but
may not represent the School in interscholastic competition.
• The student may not take part in any School activities, including dramatic
performances, the radio station, singing groups, major dances, or others.
On Probation
The student is given notice that any student standard violations during this time
may be dealt with more seriously. Being placed On Probation for a period of time
may require the student to disclose the discipline to college. Please see the section
above, as students are expected to complete all college applications completely
and honestly.
Discipline Warning
The student any student standard violations during this time may be dealt with
more seriously. Being given a Discipline Warning for a period of time may not
require the student to disclose the discipline to college. Please see the section
above, as students are expected to complete all college applications completely
and honestly.
Drug and Alcohol Testing
Students who violate the School’s Drug and Alcohol Policy will likely be place on
testing through their graduation.
Suspension
A time-specific separation from the School. The School assumes the student will
return after fulfilling specific conditions.
Active Restoration (please see below)
Dismissal
A permanent separation from the School, although the possibility of re-application
at a future time might be available if the student fulfills specific conditions.
Expulsion
A permanent separation from the School without the possibility of return.
Withdrawal
An option a student or parent may exercise to voluntarily separate from the School.
Withdrawal from the School assumes a permanent separation from the School;
however, withdrawal does not prevent the student from reapplying for admission
if the criteria for withdrawal have been fulfilled.
Violations of Student Standards
When there is a violation of Student Standards, the types of discipline may include
without limitation: On Restrictions, On Bounds, Active Restoration, suspension,
expulsion, and any other action or combination of actions deemed appropriate,
depending upon the severity of the violation and the circumstances of the situation.
129

Students are expected to be truthful when confronted with allegations or evidence
of violations of Student Standards and at any time they are participating in the
process to determine the credibility of or appropriate response to such allegations
or evidence.
In the event that a student violates student standards in a repeating or chronic
fashion, also involves a violation of a Major School Rule, or is otherwise very serious, a student may be required to meet with the Discipline Committee.
ACTIVE RESTORATION

The discipline process is an important opportunity for student learning and
growth. To intentionally facilitate that growth, the Active Restoration process is
a structure designed to guide a student through a process of rebuilding the community impacted by their words, actions, or behavior and self-reflection. It also
provides an opportunity for the student to bring closure to the discipline process
and formally regain the status of a student in good standing.
Process
• The student will choose an adult to guide them through the process (could
be DC advocate) in addition to their adviser.
• The student will return to restorative questions and develop a customized
plan for reflection and growth in conjunction with their guide. It is meant to
be an active, structured process to demonstrate growth and restorative impact
on community.
• The plan should include a proposed timeline, any community restorative
element / peer education appropriate and a final reflection.
• The Deans Team will review and approve the plan. As appropriate, member
of Deans Team will communicate with the victim(s) about the process.
• When the adult guide deems the student has sufficiently completed the plan
of active restoration, a Restorative Panel will meet to review the student
progress.
• A minimum of 4 academic weeks after the DC, but a normal process would
be expected to take longer.
• The panel will be comprised of a member of the Deans Team, the adviser, the
guide, the DC Chair, and 2 sixth form officers.
• The student will present their reflection to the panel and the adults involved
share their opinion. The Panel will opine on whether or not student has
reached a sufficient level of learning and growth after the DC and examine
other behavior (attendance, late for check, etc….) during the period.
• If active restoration continues, then would discuss timeframe, etc.
• If the panel deems the student to have adequately completed the process,
then the student will have completed the active restoration and resume their
position as a student in good standing.
130

• Communication after Restorative Panel Approval
• The panel will write a letter for the student file
• An e-mail will be sent to faculty announcing their completion and the student
will be carbon copied.

Disciplinary Reporting Policy
It is our expectation that students will respond truthfully to any questions on
college applications regarding their disciplinary records. Students who are required to do so will write statements outlining circumstances of their infractions
and will review these statements with their college advisers prior to submitting
them to colleges. The same holds true if a disciplinary infraction occurs after the
submission of an application.
Most colleges also expect the School to provide written explanations of major
disciplinary infractions, and the College Office will report the facts of all major
disciplinary violations and academic dishonesty violations in a brief report, separate
from the School’s letter of recommendation.
While disciplinary matters are a concern to colleges, our experience is that they
understand that young people make mistakes. Admissions committees are typically more concerned with the manner in which students respond to disciplinary
actions than the actual event leading to the sanctions. A mature, graceful, and
honest response to a discipline infraction can illustrate a student’s growth and
development as a young adult.
REPORTING OF DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS TO COLLEGES

• It is a School expectation that students will respond truthfully to any questions on college applications regarding their disciplinary records. Reportable
offenses include any academic or disciplinary infractions that result in probation, suspension, dismissal, or expulsion.
• Students will review college applications to determine if a college requests
information about their disciplinary record. In the case of a reportable offense, the student will write a statement outlining the circumstances of the
infraction and his/her response and growth from the situation, and will review
this statement with his or her college advisers prior to submitting it. The
same holds true if a disciplinary infraction occurs after the submission of an
application.
• When a student is required to disclose, the School will report the facts of the
case in a brief report, separate from the counselor recommendation.

131

DISCIPLINARY RESPONSE TO ACADEMIC DISHONESTY

When a faculty member suspects academic dishonesty, regardless of its nature or
degree, he or she must:
• Report the situation to their department head.
• Engage the student in a conversation about the concern.
• Report the concern to the Dean of Studies, providing evidence of the violation
and any mitigating circumstances.
The Dean of Studies, in consultation with the department head, will determine
whether or not a violation has occurred and will coordinate the School’s response
accordingly. If a student is found to be in violation of the school’s Honor Code,
he or she will normally appear before the Discipline Committee, although there
may be times when a School response is formulated without incorporating the
Discipline Committee.
The School’s response to academic dishonesty may include, but is not limited to:
• The student receives an Unsatisfactory grade of zero on the assignment
• The student is required to redo the assignment to the satisfaction of the
teacher, for no credit
• The student is required to meet with a School counselor in Clark House
• The student is ineligible for any year-end academic awards
• The student’s parents are required to come to the School to meet with the
Rector
• The student is placed On Bounds or On Restrictions
• The student is placed On Probation
• The student is suspended, dismissed, or expelled
In the event that the student does not admit guilt and the department head and
dean of studies agree that a preponderance of evidence exists of an infraction of
the Honor Code, the dean of studies will meet with the student and adviser to
inform them that a special meeting will be called to consider the situation. This
meeting will consist of the dean of studies, the five academic department heads,
the teacher involved, and the student’s adviser. The teacher and adviser will participate in this meeting to offer information about the student and the specific
situation under question, but will leave the meeting before the dean of studies
and five academic department heads deliberate the matter. It is the responsibility
of the dean of studies and the five academic department heads to determine if
an infraction of the Honor Code has occurred in these situations and to make a
recommendation to the Rector for a School response to the infraction. If guilt is
determined, the School’s response may be more severe than the response from a
Discipline Committee process for a similar situation because to agree upon guilt
under such conditions suggests a student’s untruthfulness in the process.

132

In all cases of academic dishonesty, the dean of studies will meet with the student
and adviser throughout the process and write a follow-up letter to all involved,
including the parents, after the process is complete. All cases of academic dishonesty are recorded and kept on file in the dean of studies, with a copy of the report
in the student’s file in the Dean of Students Office.
In addition to On Restrictions and On Bounds, following are other possible responses to violations of student standards.
STANDARD RESPONSES TO UNEXCUSED ABSENCES

Category I: Response to a student who has four or fewer unexcused absences
the previous term:
• 1–3 unexcused absences: Early Check In for each absence
• 4: one week of On Restrictions; required meeting with adviser and adviser
notifies parents
• 5: one week of On Bounds; required meeting with DOS and DOS notifies
parents
• 6: additional week of On Bounds
• 7: additional week of On Bounds; placed on Attendance Warning
• 8: Rector decision (likely suspension)
Category II: Response to a student who has five or more unexcused absences the
previous term:
• 1–3 unexcused absences: Early Check In for each absence
• 4: one week of On Restrictions; required meeting with adviser and adviser
notifies parents
• 5: two weeks of On Bounds; required meeting with DOS and DOS notifies
parents
• 6: additional week of On Bounds; placed on Attendance Warning
• 7: Rector decision (likely suspension; possible dismissal if previously suspended)
Category III: Response to a student who has five or more unexcused absences
the previous two terms:
• 1–2 unexcused absences: Early Check In for each absence
• 3: one week of On Restrictions; required meeting with adviser and adviser
notifies parents
• 4: one week of On Bounds; required meeting with DOS and DOS notifies
parents
• 5: additional two weeks of On Bounds; placed on Attendance Warning
• 6: Rector decision (likely suspension; possible dismissal if previously suspended)
133

Category IV: Response to a student who has five or more unexcused absences
the previous three terms:
• 1–2 unexcused absences: Early Check In for each absence
• 3: one week of On Restrictions; required meeting with adviser and adviser
notifies parents
• 4: two weeks of On Bounds; required meeting with DOS and DOS notifies
parents; placed on Attendance Warning
• 5: Rector decision (likely suspension; possible dismissal if previously suspended)
Note: Repeated but not necessarily consecutive terms of absenteeism could result in
major discipline. The dean of students and/or Rector may elect to respond to absences
during or at the conclusion of the term. Sixth Formers whose attendance records are
unsatisfactory in the spring term should expect to receive alternate consequences if there
is not enough time to serve the standard response. Any Sixth Former who accumulates
8 or more unexcused absences in the Spring Term may receive a delayed diploma and
may be excluded from Graduation exercises.
RESPONSE TO VIOLATIONS OF APPROPRIATE USE POLICY

The School’s network and other administrators shall have broad authority to
interpret and apply these policies. Violators of our technology policies will be
provided with notice and opportunity to be heard in the manner set forth in the
School Handbook, unless an issue is so severe that notice is either not possible
or not prudent in the determination of the School administrators. Restrictions
may be placed on violator’s use of School technologies and privileges related to
technology use may be revoked entirely pending any hearing to protect the safety
and well-being of our community. Violators may also be subject to discipline of
other kinds within the School’s discretion.
St. Paul’s School cooperates fully with local, state, and/or federal officials in any
investigations related to illegal activities conducted on School property or through
School technologies. School authorities have the right to confiscate personally
owned technological devices that are in violation or used in violation of School
policies. Failure to cooperate in such an investigation is regarded as grounds for
disciplinary action.
If you accidentally access inappropriate information or if someone sends you
inappropriate information, you should immediately tell a faculty member or a
member of the IT Department in order to prove that you did not deliberately access inappropriate information.
The School retains the right to suspend service, accounts, and access to data,
including student files and any other stored data, without notice to the student
if it is deemed that a threat exists to the integrity of the School network or other
safety concern of the School.
134

RESPONSE TO VIOLATION OF TOWN HOURS / FAILURE TO SIGN OUT
AND SIGN IN

If a student is in town beyond the hours outlined in the Daily Life section of the
Handbook or fails to sign out and sign back in, for a first offense the head of house
or adviser will place him or her on three nights of early check. If the student violates Town Hours again, they will be sent to the Dean of Students Office, placed
On Restrictions and warned that another violation will place them On Bounds.
Another offense will result in more serious disciplinary consequences, which may
result in the student being sent home.
RESPONSE TO STUDENT USE OF PORNOGRAPHY

Students may not possess pornographic and/or sexually explicit materials such as,
but not limited to, magazines, videos, films or photographs. Pornographic material that is accessed through the School network will fall under the Acceptable
Use of Technology Policy.
If a student is found with pornographic materials, the head of house will consult
with the Dean of Students Office to determine what action the incident warrants.
If it is determined that the situation warrants further action or is a repeat offense:
• The dean of students or associate dean will interview student(s) involved.
• The dean of students or associate dean will confiscate the pornographic material.
• The student’s adviser or the dean will inform the parents of the situation.
• The dean of students or associate dean will write a letter to the student(s)
involved placing the student On Restrictions and/or On Bounds for a period
of time determined by the dean. The dean will include in the letter a warning
to the student(s) that any other infraction of this nature will warrant a major
disciplinary response by the School.
• The dean or associate dean will forward a copy of the response letter to the
parents.
RESPONSES TO SEXUAL ACTIVITY

Understanding that sexual intimacy is a natural part of human development for
many adolescents, and with the goal of promoting healthy, sex-positive messages,
we use a health-based approach when we discover or learn of adolescent sexual
activity.
When students are sexually intimate, a dean will gather relevant information
about the intimate encounter and respond in one or some combination of the
following ways:
1. Meet individually with the students involved
2. Communicate with adviser and/or head of house
3. Communicate with parents
135

4. Require individual meeting(s) with a Clark House Counselor
5. Recommend a disciplinary response (if school rules unrelated to sexual
intimacy have been broken – e.g., being in an unauthorized space on campus,
or violating the terms of intervisitation).
It is important to note that some sexually intimate behaviors violate state laws.
(See St. Paul’s Reporting Expectations & New Hampshire Mandated Reporting
Laws.) Any member of the St. Paul’s School faculty or staff who has knowledge of
conduct in violation of New Hampshire sexual assault laws is required to report it
to the dean of students and/or vice rector for school life. Parents or legal guardians
will be notified thereafter.

136

Other Resources
How Absences are Reported/How to Clear Them
COMMON QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

When are absences reported?
If you miss a commitment it will appear on the daily attendance report the following morning.
How can I find out if I was marked absent or not?
Any student who has an unexcused absence will be e-mailed by noon the following morning (or Monday in the case of Friday or Saturday absences) with the
details of the absence, as will the faculty. You can access your attendance record
by going to millville.sps.edu, SPSEA, Attendance, Attendance Report. Enter the
date(s) you want to check, check off the types(s) of entries, and click on Go.
Mistakes can be made, and it is in your best interest to clear an incorrect absence
as soon as possible.
What do I do if I miss a commitment?
You will need to serve Early Check In (in your room from 8:30 to 10 p.m. with
no visitors) on Sunday of the following week.
How do I clear an absence?
If you believe you have a valid excuse for missing a commitment or that there has
been a mistake, you should complete an Absence Dispute Form in the Dean of
Students Office as soon as possible. To be eligible to be cleared, an absence must
be disputed no later than 3 p.m. on the first Thursday following your absence. Do
not forward your absence e-mail in an attempt to clear your absence or ask a faculty
member to e-mail for you – you must dispute the absence yourself and in person.
What if I cannot clear the absence?
An unexcused absence will require you to serve Early Check In (restricted to room
study without visitors from 8:30 p.m. to 10 p.m.) for one evening. Accumulation
of unexcused absences will lead to further consequences (see Standard Responses
to Unexcused Absences).
On Restrictions consists of the following:
• The student loses weekend privileges for the period of On Restrictions and
is restricted to the School grounds, except for a meal in town with parents
(without student guests) or a School-sponsored activity.
• The student must report to the adviser on duty and be restricted to their room
from 8:30 to 10 p.m., with no visitors.
137

• On Saturday, the student must report directly to the adviser on duty in their
house by 9 p.m. and remain in the house.
• The adviser will contact parents explaining the cause of the student’s restriction.
• Any student On Restrictions may be placed On Bounds if conduct or attitude
is unsatisfactory.
You will be placed On Bounds for accumulating subsequent absence(s) after being
placed On Restrictions in the same term. On Bounds adds penalties and restrictions to those attached to On Restrictions:
• The student loses weekend privileges for the period of On Bounds and is
restricted to the School grounds, except for a meal in town with parents
(without student guests) or a School-sponsored activity.
• The student must report to the adviser on duty and be restricted to their room
from 8:30 to 10 p.m., with no visitors.
• On Saturday, the student must report directly to the adviser on duty in their
house by 9 p.m., and remain in the house. After 9 p.m., the student may not
host guests who do not live in the house.
• The student may participate in club sports and may practice with a team but
may not represent the School in interscholastic competition.
• The student may not take part in any School activities, including dramatic
performances, the radio station, singing groups, or others.
• A dean will meet with the student and inform the parents.
• Additional absences accumulated while On Bounds or after serving On Bounds
in the same term may result in additional time On Bounds or in possible
suspension or dismissal.

Expenses
DAILY EXPENSES/ATM

Students should not need to carry more than $25 in cash or need to keep cash in
their rooms. Rooms in student houses cannot be locked, and the School will not
be responsible for valuable items of clothing, jewelry, and furnishings that are lost,
stolen, or damaged. Textbooks may be charged at the School Store. Although many
of the following items may be charged at the School Store, it is convenient for
students to have cash for cab and bus fare, food delivery, snacks at the Freeman
Center, books, toiletries, and writing materials.
A checking account, preferably in Concord, is recommended. Students may cash
checks for a maximum of $200 per week at the School Store (third-party and payroll
checks excluded). There is also an ATM machine available in the Friedman Community Center. There is a transaction fee, which covers the cost of the machine.

138

STUDENT ID/LAUNDRY CARD

When arriving at St. Paul’s, each student is issued a photo identification card that
also provides access to School buildings via a proximity (PROX) card system.
Please note that it is a major school rule violation to be in possession of keys or
proximity card(s) that are not your own. (See Major School Rules).
Students may also request a separate card capable of storing monetary deposits
that can then be used for laundry machines in the dorms and for refreshments
at the Tuck Shop.
Lost Cards
A lost card should be reported to the Dean of Students Office. There is a $20 fee to
generate a new proximity card. The charge will be made to the student’s account.
A $5 cash fee will be charged to replace a lost laundry card. Students will not be
reimbursed for the value on lost cards.
Damaged or Broken Cards
An inoperative or broken card should be brought to the Facilities Office in the
Physical Plant building. A new card will be issued to the student at no cost. The
student may be reimbursed the amount on the card, not to exceed $20.
LAUNDRY

Students may either use the washers and dryers available in their dorm, utilizing
a declining balance card (see previous page) that can be refilled at the Tuck Shop
and Post Office, or subscribe to a service plan offered by E&R Laundry and Dry
Cleaners of Manchester, New Hampshire. Students are encouraged to label all
clothing with first and last name.
E&R Cleaners provides a laundry bag and offers six different levels of service for
the academic year. Parents receive a mailing directly from E&R during the summer. To sign up, go to www.thecampuslaundry.com. The SPS school password
is cq68. To reach Customer Service, call 1-800-243-7789 (in the U.S.) or e-mail
info@eandrcleaners.com.
SCHOOL BOOKSTORE

The St. Paul’s School Bookstore, operated by the Follett Higher Education Group,
is located between Memorial Hall and the Central Heating Plant, with direct access
from Dunbarton Road. The store is open throughout the year, Monday through
Saturday during the day, with extended days or hours as needed for special events.
It is the only facility on the grounds for purchasing textbooks, school and art supplies, clothing, gifts, and toiletries. Please visit the website at www.efollett.com,
or click the link from the A-Z index at www.sps.edu.
ST. PAUL’S SCHOOL CHARGE ACCOUNT

The School allows students to charge items sold in the School Bookstore to their
student account with the Business Office. The charges are billed on a monthly
statement from the Business Office and are due before the end of the following
139

month or finance charges are assessed. The School reserves the right to notify Follett that a student can no longer charge on this account due to unpaid balances.
BOOKSTORE PREPAID ACCOUNT

In addition to their St. Paul’s School charge account, students also have the option
of opening a Bookstore Prepaid Account. In order to do so, a parent or guardian
would call the School Bookstore at 603-229-4789 to set up the account. This type
of account can replace the Student Charge Account if desired. Payment using a
credit card, in the amount desired by the parent or guardian, will be accepted to
set up the account. A Bookstore Prepaid Account can also be set up using cash or
a personal check. Once an account is established at the School Bookstore, students
are able to charge purchases to the prepaid account, resulting in a declining balance as the account is used. Additional funds may be added to the account at any
time. For security purposes, all credit card numbers used to establish or replenish
funds on an account will be destroyed as soon as the account is set up or added
to. This type of account allows students to purchase what they need at the School
Bookstore while protecting parents’ credit card information. Restrictions regarding
what your student can purchase and charge to their Bookstore Prepaid Account
can also be established. If setting up an account by check, please send payment to
the attention of The School Bookstore and made payable to St. Paul’s School Store.

Staying in Touch
Students find out what is going on in the community and may post notices of
meetings through a variety of different sources:
• general community announcements in a “Daily Announcements” e-mail
• the student newspaper, The Pelican
• bulletin boards in the Schoolhouse, at the post office, and in Coit
• a calendar of events, located on the Millville site at millville.sps.edu/allaccess/
spscalendar
• in Chapel during Reports
• announcements in Chapel (see Chapel Announcements and Reserving a
Meeting Space for more information and proper procedures).
• students have many means of communication at their disposal including
voice-mail, e-mail, and announcements.
For information on how to use the voice-mail system and other technology including computers and phones, see Information Technology.
To schedule an event for the School, see Ms. Ferman.

140

TELEPHONE SERVICE

St. Paul’s School provides in excess of 90 public telephones throughout the
grounds. Each house has a minimum of two public phones that are accessible on
a 24 hour-a-day basis, seven days a week.
For service problems/inquiries, please contact the SPS Help Desk at ext. 2000 or
603-229-5698 (from outside the School).
Making an Internal Call: To call another telephone station on the grounds, just
dial the last four (4) digits of the telephone number.
Making an External Call: Local – Dial “8,” then dial the telephone number.
Long Distance / International Long Distance: St. Paul’s School provides local
telephone calling to students from phones in the house common rooms. Students
will need to use their mobile phones to make calls beyond Concord.
POST OFFICE

The School Post Office operates like a small-town post office. Each student and
faculty member has a post office box for letters and small packages. Students may
send and receive packages, letters, and faxes.
You are assigned a box with a combination and are given written instructions on
how to open your box. Keep your copy of the combination in a safe place! Generally, your mail will be in your box by about 10 a.m. Packages arrive a little later.
Also located in the Post Office is a fax machine. The fax number is 603-229-4649.
Students may send faxes only when the window is open, but faxes may be received
anytime and are distributed to student P.O. boxes.
Window hours in the morning and afternoon vary during the year and are posted
on the SPS intranet.
Mail is picked up from the mailbox outside the Post Office once daily at 4:30
p.m. Monday through Friday. On Saturday, the mail is picked up once at 1 p.m.
There is no Sunday or holiday pick up. Stamps and all other services are available
during window hours.
United Parcel Service, Federal Express, and Airborne Express make morning
deliveries to the Shipping/Receiving Office at the White Barn. Packages are then
taken to the SPS Post Office or delivered to the appropriate department. To expedite delivery and minimize delivery errors, please be sure that the recipient’s
name and/or department is on incoming parcels. Packages are usually available at
the SPS Post Office by early afternoon. U.S. Express mail is delivered to the SPS
Post Office. Please note that there are no Saturday deliveries. When you receive a
package, an electronic notification will be sent to your SPS e-mail address. Please
bring a copy of this e-mail with you when you come to collect your package.
Unclaimed packages that remain in the Post Office for more than 30 days may be
returned or discarded.
141

WHITE BARN SHIPPING AND RECEIVING OFFICE

Outgoing UPS and Overnight Services: The Shipping/Receiving Office at the White
Barn provides outgoing UPS and overnight shipping services. UPS packages must
be at the White Barn by 3 p.m. for shipping the next day. Overnight packages
must be there by 2 p.m. to ship that day. U.S. Express mail service is available at
the SPS Post Office.
Shipping/Receiving Office hours
• Weekdays: 7:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., and 1 to 4 p.m.
• During the summer: Weekdays 7 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., and 1 to 3:30 p.m.
• All Year: Closed Saturday and Sunday

What to Bring From Home
The School provides the following for every student:
• A bed (twin XL)
• A bureau
• Pillows
• A desk
• Ceiling lights
• A chair
You will need to bring these outer clothing items:
• Heavy coat/warm outer clothing
• Waterproof and insulated boots or shoes
• Hats and gloves
• Heavy sweaters or fleece-type vests and pullovers
You need to bring in addition to personal items and clothing:
• Sheets (twin XL) and towels if not rented from E&R Laundry
• Blankets
• Toiletry kit
(Please mark all clothing and blankets with indelible pen or sewn-on name tags.)
Items that students often bring include:
• Computers (monitors must not exceed 27 inches; the use of projectors/projection systems are allowed only at the discretion of the head of house)
• Lamps
• Alarm clocks with batteries
• Power strips with circuit breakers for operating multiple electrical devices

142

• Headphones to keep music from disturbing your roommate or neighbors
• Cell Phone
• Lockbox
• Bicycle and helmet
• Sunscreen and insect repellent
Personal Property
Families should be aware that the School’s insurance does not cover the personal
property of any student. The School recommends that families purchase insurance
that cover any personal property brought on campus. Any personal property left
in any school building (including the student’s house room) or left outside on
campus is done so at the student’s risk. The School also does not provide summer
storage for a student’s personal belongings.

Meals and Deliveries
The typical day begins with breakfast in Coit, where everything is offered, from
juice, cereals, pastries, muffins, toast, and fruits to made-to-order eggs, omelets,
pancakes, and occasionally sausage and bacon, make-your-own smoothies, and
make-your-own waffles.
SEATED MEAL

Seated Meals are formal dinners designed to give students the opportunity to
converse with students and faculty they might not otherwise get to know. There
is a dress code for Seated Meal. Seated Meals begin at 6 p.m. Students are assigned
to different tables on a rotating basis and attendance is taken. Only the Dean of
Students Office may grant permission to miss a Seated Meal. All other meals are
cafeteria style.
GUESTS AT MEALS

Students who wish to have a guest dine with them (other than immediate family)
in the dining hall should contact the Dean of Students Office in order to secure
permission.
KWOK CAFE/GRAB ’N GO DELI BAR LUNCH

The Kwok Cafe is located in the Friedman Community Center and offers grilledto-order breakfast and other items Tuesday through Saturday 8:30 a.m. to 2:30
p.m. and 7 p.m. until check-in time.
The Grab ’n Go Deli Bar lunch offers a quick, convenient alternative to cafeteria
lunch and is available in the Kwok Cafe Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday
(except School holidays) from 11:30 a.m. to 1 p.m.

143

FOOD DELIVERY

While students should have regular meals in the dining hall, they may want to
order takeout on occasion. Deliveries can be made to three locations: in front of
Foster House, the Gymnasium parking lot, and the entrance to the driveway of Coit.
Approved food delivery hours:
• Sunday: 8 a.m.–9:45 p.m.
• Monday: 2:15–9:45 p.m.
• Tuesday: 7–9:45 p.m.
• Wednesday: 12:30–9:45 p.m.
• Thursday: 7–9:45 p.m.
• Friday: 2:15–9:45 p.m.
• Saturday: 12:30–9:45 p.m.

Technology Resources
WHAT IS PROVIDED

Network Services: All academic and administrative buildings, as well as student
housing, are connected to our switched Ethernet network and fiber optic backbone.
Wireless connectivity is available in the student house study pods, most academic
locations, throughout Ohrstrom Library, and in other key gathering spots.
Internet Access: Internet access is provided to all academic and administrative
areas, at campus public computing locations, and to students in their houses. Electronic mail is available over the Internet. In deference to the School’s educational
mission, as well as the wishes of the School’s faculty, student Internet access is
“shut down” during overnight hours from 12 a.m. (midnight) to 6 a.m. with an
exception made on Saturdays extending it to 2 a.m.
Intranet Access: Students have access to the School’s intranet in their rooms.
Public areas within the Library, common rooms, and the academic buildings
also have intranet access. The School’s growing list of intranet services includes
online library catalog access, full electronic mail access (see Electronic Mail), the
Blackboard course management system, and access to the School’s web pages.
File Services: The School provides file servers for the community that are backed
up daily. Each end user is allotted a fixed amount of personal network storage space.
Electronic Mail: The School provides an electronic mail server. The officially
supported e-mail program is Webmail for students and Outlook or Entourage for
dedicated faculty and staff computers. E-mail is automatically set up for every
new student. Before it is activated, however, the student is required to attend a
Technology Orientation and sign an Appropriate Use Agreement.

144

Public Computing: The School provides extensive public computing resources
in many locations. There are more than 500 computers available around campus
for student use.
Public Phones: There are more than 90 public phones located throughout the
grounds. Each student residence has at least two public phones. A complete listing may be found in the Directory.
SUPPORTED HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE

Macintosh vs. Windows: Currently, both Apple OS X and Windows operating
systems are used for academic purposes at St. Paul’s. Academic departments
are platform-specific to simplify the sharing of resources in shared classrooms.
Administrative workstations are primarily Windows-based.
Academic and administrative systems have standardized on the Windows 7,
Windows 8, Windows 10, or Apple OS X operating systems.
The following table shows some minimum recommended hardware configurations
that new computers should meet or exceed.
Recommended Specifications:
CONFIGURATION

WINDOWS PC*

APPLE MACINTOSH*

Operating System*

Windows 10, 8, or 7

OS X

Desktop Productivity

Microsoft Office Standard/
Student Edition

Microsoft Office Standard/
Student Edition

Memory (RAM)

8 GB minimum;

2 GB minimum;

Hard Disk

200 GB or higher

200 GB or higher

Network

Wireless available in houses and most academic spaces.

*The campus Information Technology Department will make every effort to support older discontinued manufacturer operating systems. However, lack of manufacturer support and upgrades
coupled with instabilities inherent in these operating systems may prove incompatible with the
campus network and resources.

If you have questions regarding the configuration of your computer, call the IT
Help Desk at ext. 2000 or 603-229-5698 from outside the School.
PURCHASING A COMPUTER

Students are not required to purchase and/or bring their own personal computers
with them to St. Paul’s School. The School provides students with an ample supply
of public computing resources to meet most academic needs.
However, you may already own a computer and wonder if it is appropriate for use
at St. Paul’s School. We suggest that you review the section on Supported Hardware and Software for specifications regarding which hardware and software are
“minimally acceptable” for use at St. Paul’s School. Please note that this section is
145

updated annually. The School’s network supports either Macintosh or Windows
computers. The School has standardized on Mac OS X and Microsoft Windows XP
and Vista operating systems. IT will attempt to support older operating systems
(Windows 98, OS 9, etc.) but the end-user should be aware that these platforms
are no longer maintained or supported by the manufacturer, which in turn limits
problem resolution.
SOFTWARE

The School provides standard “administrative” software for faculty and staff and
for public and classroom computers. In addition, students can reasonably expect
to find the following software on all School computers, either on the individual
workstations or over the St. Paul’s Network. We endeavor to make available current versions of our standard software, while continuing to provide older versions
required for the older computers.
THE HELP DESK

The IT Help Desk assists members of the SPS community (students, faculty, and
staff) in their use of the School’s information and communications technology.
IT staff covering the Help Desk are responsible for the following:
• Providing rapid response to all classroom technology issues
• Answering all user questions and inquiries
• Providing direct solutions to simple user problems or difficulties
• Referring more difficult problems that cannot be resolved over the telephone
to the appropriate IT service personnel
• Notifying the SPS community of any planned disruptions of service due to
the implementation of new technology or required preventive maintenance
Any failures of, or problems with, SPS technology should be reported immediately
to the IT Help Desk by calling ext. 2000 or from outside the School 603-229-5698;
or by sending an e-mail to help@sps.edu.
The IT Help Desk is staffed Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Any
voice-mail or e-mail messages received after hours or on the weekends will be
cleared and addressed before 9 a.m. on the next business day.
The SPS community will be notified in advance if the Help Desk will not be staffed
during regular “business hours” and all voice-mail and e-mail messages will be
cleared and addressed by other IT personnel on an hourly basis.

146

TECHNICAL EMERGENCIES

•
•
•
•
•

A technical emergency requires one of the following conditions:
A widespread loss of basic network service
A widespread loss of basic telephone service
The loss of primary file services
The failure of a major administration applications server

Any user experiencing a technical emergency should do the following:
• During regular operating hours (Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.), immediately contact the IT Help Desk at ext. 2000 or 603-229-5698
(from outside the School) and report the situation.
After hours or on weekends notify the most convenient and/or available of:
• Head of house or on-duty faculty member
• Personnel at the front desk of Ohrstrom Library
• On-duty Security officer
St. Paul’s School provides several levels of technology-related help for computers,
telephone, or voice-mail, much of which is available around the clock:
• The Information Technology Department (IT) manages the Help Desk at ext.
2000 or 603-229-5698 (from outside the School) to provide answers to common computer questions, schedule repairs, and direct callers to the member
of the IT best qualified to help users solve their problems. The Help Desk is
staffed Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., but you can leave
a message 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
• The Academic Technology Window is open from 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. in the
Schoolhouse from Monday through Friday. Anyone with a technical problem
is welcome to stop by for help.
• The staff of Ohrstrom Library and the director of the Language Center also
can provide help with computer questions.
STUDENT PERSONAL SYSTEM REPAIR

Although IT’s primary responsibility is the support of School-owned hardware,
they will make every effort to assist students experiencing problems with their
personal computers. Students are invited to bring their “broken” computers to the
Schoolhouse Tech Shop during normal IT hours of operation. The IT technical
staff will attempt to diagnose and repair the hardware and/or software problems
at no charge to the student. Upon communicating the need to the student, IT will
bill back the student’s account for any parts required.
Should the device require manufacturer specific warranty work IT will coordinate
with the visiting manufacturers’ technician or help the student arrange return
shipping if required.
147

Advanced repairs outside of the manufacturer’s warranty and/or requiring replacement components (disk drives, LCD panels, etc.) may be forwarded to a third-party
(manufacturer approved) service provider for repairs. Should a third-party service
be required, the costs of these repairs will fall to the students (or more specifically
the parents). Call the Help Desk at ext. 2000 or 603-229-5698 (from outside the
School) to receive more information regarding this program.
APPLICATION HELP

Sometimes special help is required in using school specific applications. Help is
available with report writing, web pages and special projects. Inquiries should
be made initially through the Help Desk and then scheduled with the individual
support person who will be providing the help.
TRAINING AT ST. PAUL’S SCHOOL

IT provides special Opening Days training sessions for new students at the beginning of the school year. This mini-course covers a wide range of topics, including
student network and computing resources at SPS; the School’s appropriate use
policies; the St. Paul’s network navigation; student network folders, privileges,
and file operations; e-mail account startup and practice; basic Internet tools; and
an introduction to Academic Technology personnel and support services.
IT, in conjunction with faculty and student advisors, also works with students to
provide specific training sessions as needed on class-specific software and special
lab equipment.
Self-directed training is available online. The Ohrstrom Library also has training
videos on reserve for patron use and purchases computer books and periodicals
for the library collection.
PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT (PRINTERS, SCANNERS, ETC.)

Most SPS classrooms and labs are equipped with networked computers and peripheral equipment for use during class hours. The School also provides many
computers for general public use. All are equipped with standard SPS academic
software and can access network services and resources, including networked
laser printers via the St. Paul’s network.
Clusters of public computers are available for student use in the Lindsay Center, Schoolhouse Language Center, and Ohrstrom Library. All houses also have
computers for student use, either in common rooms or special computer rooms.
The School provides networked laser printers for student use in all academic
buildings as well as in student housing. Printers are distributed throughout the
campus. The Language Center and the Hargate Graphic Design Studio have color
printers that can be used by special arrangement.
Photocopiers are available for student use in the lower level of the Schoolhouse and
in Ohrstrom Library. Students may send and receive faxes at the SPS Post Office.
148

Additional peripheral equipment for student use is located in the Multimedia
Room in the IT Office area. IT provides resources for multimedia production and
video editing. Also available by special arrangement are digital video cameras,
projectors, and photo equipment.
COPIERS

IT is responsible for all of the School’s copiers. This includes both color copying
and networked printing services. While Ohrstrom Library provides basic copier
services for students, all other copiers are generally restricted to faculty and staff
use only.

Campus Vocabulary
Language is powerful and significantly informs how we live and communicate.
To help navigate our richly diverse SPS community and engage in thoughtful and
meaningful discourse with one another, we offer some basic campus vocabulary.
DIVERSITY GLOSSARY

Please consider the following definitions as a starting point. Because language
constantly changes and evolves, we encourage you to search for the appropriate
words and continue to investigate and expand your awareness, understanding,
and knowledge of the people who make up the SPS community and the world.
ABLEISM: The system of oppression based on ability. Assumes people with disabilities as flawed, insufficient, and inferior. Includes assumptions about what is
“normal” and results in the marginalization of people with disabilities.
ACCULTURATION: The process of learning and incorporating the language,
values, beliefs, and behaviors that makes up a distinct culture.
ASSIMILATION: The process whereby an individual, family, or group may give
up certain aspects of their own culture in order to adapt to that of their new host
country.
CLASS: As in upper, middle, lower class, working class; refers to people’s socioeconomic status based on factors such as wealth, occupation, education, income,
and assets.
CLASSISM: Prejudice or discrimination on the basis of social class. Includes
individual attitudes and behaviors, as well as systems of policies and practices
that are set up to benefit the upper classes at the expense of the lower classes.
CULTURAL COMPETENCE: The ability to interact effectively with people of
different cultures and ethnic backgrounds.

149

DISABILITY/DIFFERENTLY ABLED: A condition or function judged to be significantly impaired relative to the usual standard of an individual or group. The
term is used to refer to individual functioning, including physical impairment,
sensory impairment, cognitive impairment, intellectual impairment, mental illness, and various types of chronic diseases.
DISCRIMINATION: Actions, based on conscious or unconscious prejudice, that
favor one group over others in the provision of goods, services, or opportunities;
unfavorable or unfair treatment toward an individual or group based on race, sex,
color, religion, national origin, age, physical/mental abilities, or sexual orientation.
DIVERSITY: The recognition of differences among people. These differences include but are not limited to ethnicity, religion, age, gender, class, culture, cognitive
ability, physical ability, life experiences, family situations, and sexual orientation.
EQUITY: The guarantee of fair treatment, access, opportunity, and advancement
for all students, faculty, and staff, while at the same time striving to identify and
eliminate barriers that have prevented the full participation of some groups. The
principle of equity acknowledges that there are historically underserved and underrepresented populations and that fairness regarding these unbalanced conditions
is needed to assist equality in the provision of effective opportunities to all groups.
ETHNICITY: A social construct that divides people into groups based on characteristics such as a shared sense of group identity, values, culture, language, history,
ancestry, and geography.
FEMINISM: A movement to end sexism and oppression based on gender and
gender identity; the belief that men and women should have equal rights and
opportunities.
GAY/LESBIAN: Words used to describe people who are emotionally, romantically, and/or physically attracted to some members of the same sex and/or gender.
GENDER: A noun that can be usefully divided into two separate concepts. First,
gender identity describes a person’s own internal – and often deeply held – sense of
their gender. Many people have a gender identity of “man” or “woman” (or “boy”
or “girl”), but for many others their gender identity does not fit neatly into one
of those two categories. Second, gender expression describes external manifestations of gender, including behavior, name, preferred pronouns, clothing, hairstyle,
voice, and/or body characteristics. Society identifies these cues as masculine and
feminine, although what is considered masculine and feminine changes over time
and varies by culture. Gender expression should not be viewed as an indication
of sexual orientation.
GLOBAL AWARENESS: The understanding of world and cultural perspectives.
Awareness broadens from learning from and working collaboratively with individuals representing diverse cultures, religions, and lifestyles in a spirit of mutual
respect and open dialogue in personal, work, and community contexts.
150

HETERONORMATIVE: Denoting or relating to a worldview that naturalizes
heterosexuality as the normal or preferred sexual orientation.
HETEROSEXISM: The system of oppression that assumes heterosexuality as the
norm, favors heterosexuals, and denigrates and stigmatizes anyone whose gender
or sexual behavior is considered non-heterosexual.
INCLUSION: The act of creating environments in which any individual or group
can be and feel welcomed, respected, supported, and valued to fully participate.
An inclusive and welcoming climate embraces differences and offers respect in
words and actions for all people.
INTERCULTURAL COMPETENCE: The ability to communicate effectively and
appropriately in a variety of cultural contexts with people across cultures.
INTERSECTIONALITY: The idea that classifications such as gender, race, and class
– and others – cannot be examined in isolation from one another; they interact and
intersect in individuals’ lives and in social systems and are mutually constitutive.
LGBTQIA+: An acronym that strives to include all non-(hetero)normative sexual
and/or gender identities, including lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer,
questioning, intersex, asexual, agender, and more.
MICROAGGRESSIONS: Subtle words, cues, and/or behaviors that insult, invalidate, or exclude traditionally marginalized group members. The long-term
effect of microaggressions can have a significant negative impact on one’s health.
OPPRESSION: The systemic devaluing, undermining, marginalizing, and disadvantaging of certain social identities in contrast to the privileged norm; when some
people are denied something of value, while others have ready access.
PREJUDICE: A preconceived judgment about a person or group of people, usually indicating negative bias.
PRIVILEGE: Systematic favoring, enriching, valuing, validating, and including
of certain social identities over others. Individuals cannot “opt out” of systems of
privilege; these systems are inherent to the society in which we live.
RACE: A non-biological, social construct that divides people in groups based
on factors such as physical appearance, ancestry, culture, history, etc.; a social,
historical, and political classification system.
RACISM: A system of oppression involving subordination of members of targeted
racial groups by those who have relatively more social power. This subordination
occurs at the individual, cultural, and institutional levels.
SEXISM: A system of sex oppression that privileges men, subordinates women, and
denigrates women-identified value. This subordination occurs at the individual,
cultural, and institutional levels.
151

SEXUAL ORIENTATION: A noun that describes an individual’s enduring physical, romantic, and/or emotional attractions. Some people experience their sexual
orientation as static throughout life, while others experience it as changing or even
fluid. Sexual orientation is different from gender identity and gender expression.
TRANSGENDER: An adjective used as an umbrella term to describe people whose
gender identity and/or gender expression differs from what is typically associated
with the sex they were assigned at birth. Being transgender does not indicate one’s
sexual orientation.
UNCONSCIOUS/IMPLICIT BIAS: A positive or negative mental attitude, held
at an unconscious level, toward a person, thing, or group.
WHITE SKIN PRIVILEGE: A set of benefits, including greater access to resources
and power, which in many institutional contexts tend to be, and historically have
been, bestowed upon people classified as white, based on the color of their skin.
XENOPHOBIA: Fear and hatred of strangers or foreigners or of anything that is
strange or foreign.

152

In	  case	  of	  a	  SCHOOL	  EMERGENCY	  
follow	  these	  instructions	  

FIRE/SMOKE	  

ARMED	  
INTRUDER	  

MEDICAL	  

	  
	  

	  

SEVERE	  
WEATHER	  

Seek	  shelter	  away	  from	  
exterior	  windows	  and	  doors.	  
Move	  to	  the	  basement	  o f	  
buildings	  during	  high	  
windstorms.	  
	  
Do	  not	  go	  outside	  during	  
	  
lightning	  o r	  windstorms	  
until	  
5	  minutes	  after	  storm	  passes.	  
	  
Be	  aware	  of	  downed	  wires	  and	  
falling	  objects.	  
	  
If	  possible,	  shut	  w indows	  and	  
doors.	  

	  

SUSPICIOUS	  
PACKAGE	  

Do	  not	  touch	  or	  disturb	  
object.	  
	  
Contact	  911	  or	  St.	  Paul’s	  
Safety	  Department	  at	  229-­‐
4646	  to	  report	  the	  item.	  
	  
Be	  prepared	  to	  evacuate	  if	  
necessary.	  Exit	  routes	  may	  
not	  be	  the	  normal	  way	  o ut.	  
	  
If	  told	  to	  evacuate,	  look	  
around	  for	  other	  suspicious	  
items	  and	  report	  to	  
authorities.	  

POWER	  
OUTAGE	  

If	  necessary,	  move	  cautiously	  
to	  a	  well	  lit	  area.	  
	  
Use	  flashlights	  or	  cell	  phones	  
to	  light	  your	  work	  areas.	  
	  
For	  localized	  outages	  contact	  
the	  Facilities	  Dept.	  at	  229-­‐
4600.	  
	  
For	  information	  during	  a	  
long-­‐term	  o utage	  check	  
emails	  for	  communications.	  

	  
	  

FIRE,	  POLICE,	  AMBULANCE	  –	  911	  
ST.	  PAUL’S	  SCHOOL	  SAFETY	  DEPT.	  –	  (603)	  229-­‐4646	  

153

	  

EMERGENCY	  RESPONSES	  

BUILDING	  
EVACUATION	  

	   	   Walk;	  don’t	  run,	  to	  the	  nearest	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
exit	  and	  leave	  the	  building.	  
	  
Be	  aware,	  some	  exits	  may	  be	  
unusable	  due	  to	  smoke	  or	  
danger.	  
	  
Do	  not	  use	  the	  elevator	  to	  exit	  a	  
building.	  	  
	  
If	  you	  can	  do	  so	  quickly,	  grab	  
your	  coat	  and	  other	  valuables	  as	  
you	  may	  be	  out	  of	  the	  building	  
for	  an	  extended	  period	  o f	  time.	  
	  
Report	  to	  the	  buildings	  meeting	  
place	  for	  attendance	  purposes.	  

SECURE	  CAMPUS	  

If	  outside,	  enter	  nearest	  
building	  and	  w ait	  until	  told	  
otherwise.	  
	  
Close	  w indows	  and	  doors	  and	  
shut	  curtains	  i f	  available.	  
	  
Continue	  normal	  indoor	  
	  
academic	  functions	  unless	  
told	  to	  take	  another	  action.	  
	  
Cancel	  o utdoor	  activities.	  
	  
Entering	  and	  leaving	  school	  
buildings	  may	  be	  confined	  to	  
one	  entrance,	  which	  will	  be	  
monitored.	  Information	  will	  
be	  provided.	  

	  

LOCKDOWN	  

SHELTER	  
IN	  PLACE	  

	  

	  	  

SIREN	  
ACTIVATION	  

When	  the	  outside	  siren	  
activates,	  all	  people	  should	  
enter	  the	  nearest	  building	  
and	  begin	  to	  Lockdown.	  
	  
Additional	  information	  will	  
be	  forthcoming	  once	  i t	  i s	  
available.	  Monitor	  in	  building	  
speakers	  when	  possible	  and	  
silence	  cell	  phones.	  
	  
Never	  assume	  the	  event	  is	  
over	  until	  you	  have	  d efinitive	  
communication	  or	  the	  ALL	  
CLEAR	  siren	  has	  been	  heard.	  	  
	  

ADULT	  
RESPONSIBILITIES	  
Call	  911	  for	  help,	  or	  Safety	  
Dept.	  at	  229-­‐4646.	  
	  
During	  an	  emergency,	  adults	  
should	  remain	  calm,	  take	  
control	  of	  students	  in	  their	  
immediate	  area	  and	  reassure	  
students.	  
	  
Monitor	  communication	  items	  
(phone,	  computer,	  in	  building	  
speakers)	  for	  additional	  
information	  when	  safe	  to	  do	  
so.	  
	  
Model	  responsible	  behavior	  
during	  an	  emergency.	  
	  

FIRE,	  POLICE,	  AMBULANCE	  –	  911	  
ST.	  PAUL’S	  SCHOOL	  SAFETY	  DEPT.	  –	  (603)	  229-­‐4646	  

154

155

156

TOWN HOURS
Town hours begin after class hours on Monday through Saturday and at 10 a.m.
on Sunday. Students must return and sign in by:
		
THIRD FORM

FOURTH FORM

FIFTH FORM

SIXTH FORM

SUNDAY

6:30 p.m.

6:30 p.m.

7:30 p.m.

7:30 p.m.

MONDAY

6:30 p.m.

6:30 p.m.

7:30 p.m.

7:30 p.m.

TUESDAY

6:30 p.m.

6:30 p.m.

7:30 p.m.

7:30 p.m.

WEDNESDAY

6:30 p.m.

6:30 p.m.

7:30 p.m.

7:30 p.m.

THURSDAY

6:30 p.m.

6:30 p.m.

7:30 p.m.

7:30 p.m.

FRIDAY

6:30 p.m.

6:30 p.m.

7:30 p.m.

7:30 p.m.

SATURDAY

10:30 p.m.

10:30 p.m.

10:30 p.m.

11:30 p.m.

Sixth Formers involved with an ISP (Independent Study Project) or other special School
commitments may have special permission to leave the School during other times.

ON RESTRICTIONS AND ON BOUNDS
The chart explains the differences between the most common responses.
(OR) ON RESTRICTIONS

(OB) ON BOUNDS

(DCOB) DC ON BOUNDS

8:30 to 10 p.m.
8:30 to 10 p.m.
7:30 p.m. to morning
Check-In in room; no visitors
in room; no visitors
in room; no visitors
			
Saturday
9 p.m. to morning
9 p.m. to morning
9 p.m. to morning
Check-In
in house
in house
in house
Sports &
YES
NO
NO
Activities
Weekend
NO
NO
NO
Privileges
Town
meal with parents;
meal with parents;
meal with parents;
Privileges
School activity
no visitors/guests
no visitors/guests
Notification
adviser
appropriate dean
dean of students
of Parents

CHECK-IN
Standard check-in times are as follows:
THIRD FORM
• Sunday through Friday, 9 p.m.
• Saturday, 11 p.m.
FOURTH AND FIFTH FORMS
• Sunday through Friday, 9:30 p.m.
• Saturday, 11 p.m.
SIXTH FORM
• Sunday through Friday, 10 p.m.
• Saturday, 12 midnight

EMERGENCY PHONE NUMBERS
GENERAL
Fire Department...................................................................... 911
Police Emergency.................................................................... 911
Ambulance.............................................................................. 911
Safety..............................................................................229-4646
DEAN OF STUDENTS OFFICE
Jennifer Cotton...............................................................229-4813
Suzanne Ellinwood.........................................................229-4810
Aaron Marsh ’97, Dean...................................................229-4807
Beverly Moller................................................................229-4724
Bonnie Roy.....................................................................229-4811
Grace Saravia, Off-Campus Programs............................229-4845
Kathy Taylor, Community Outreach..............................229-4706
RECTOR’S OFFICE
Kathleen Koesterer.........................................................229-4801
BUSINESS OFFICE.......................................................229-4749
LIBRARY........................................................................229-4860
ADMISSION..................................................................229-4700
ST. PAUL’S SCHOOL MEDICAL ASSISTANCE
Clark House...................................................................229-4850

325 Pleasant Street
Concord, NH 03301-2591
603-229-4600 / www.sps.edu
Copyright 2017, all rights reserved.


